Title: Insulation: first the body, then the home
Date: 2011-02-27 01:05
Author: Kris De Decker
Category: Low-tech Solutions
Tags: house insulation, insulation, thermal underclothing, thermal underwear
Slug: body-insulation-thermal-underwear
Status: published


You could fill a library with reports and books describing the
importance of energy-efficient heating systems and home insulation.
However, not a word has been said or written about the energy savings
potential of clothing, even though there has been a lot of progress in
this area too. Modern thermal underclothing offers the possibility to
turn the thermostat much lower without sacrificing comfort or sex
appeal. The potential energy savings are huge; the costs are almost nil.

This article explains through science and statistics how to maintain
thermal comfort at any given indoor temperature using only clothes.

Photo credit: [Woolpower](http://www.woolpower.se/en/default.asp).


Over the last decades, both the insulation of homes and the energy
efficiency of heating appliances have improved considerably. These
efforts have led to substantial energy savings in fuel consumption. In
spite of population growth, higher comfort levels, and a trend towards
building larger homes, total energy consumption for space heating by
American households came down from 5.32 quadrillion Btu in 1993 to 4.30
quadrillion Btu in 2005
([source](http://www.eia.doe.gov/emeu/recs/recs2005/c&e/detailed_tables2005c&e.html)).
Similar trends can be seen in other industrialized countries.

Nevertheless, space heating still consumes a huge amount of energy,
which comes almost exclusively from fossil fuels. Moreover, these
figures do not take into account the energy that was spent to demolish
old buildings and build new, more energy-efficient homes. Research
([source](http://www.emptyhomes.com/documents/publications/reports/New%20Tricks%20With%20Old%20Bricks%20-%20final%2012-03-081.pdf)
- pdf) indicates that it can take 35 to 50 years before this embodied
energy is recovered. This means that if a new, efficient building does
not last that long, the result is more energy consumption, not less -
though it will show up otherwise in statistics.

Further improvements in energy-efficient buildings and heating systems
can be expected, but apart from the embodied energy required to make the
housing stock more efficient, there is an additional problem that
prevents a fast and steep reduction in energy consumption: cost. Home
insulation and energy-efficient heating appliances are expensive, which
means that many people simply cannot afford the investment. There is
also the problem of "split incentives": the owner of a rented house has
no incentive to improve efficiency if the tenant is paying the heating
bills.

Room temperature

There is another way to reduce energy consumption for space heating that
does not have any of these disadvantages: lowering the thermostat and
putting on more clothes. Although room temperature is hardly ever
mentioned as a factor in energy use, it is a decisive factor in the
energy consumption of heating systems - just as the [speed of an
automobile]({filename}/posts/speed-energy.md) is
a decisive factor in the energy use of an engine. Precisely how much
energy can be saved by lowering the thermostat depends on the outdoor
temperature. In temperate climates, lowering the thermostat just 1° C
(or about 2°F) yields an energy savings of about 9 to 10 percent
(sources:
[1](http://www.eia.doe.gov/emeu/consumptionbriefs/recs/thermostat_settings/thermostat.html)
&
[2](Energy%20reduction%20options%20for%20the%20domestic%20maintenance%20of%20%20textiles)
- p20,
pdf).[](http://krisdedecker.typepad.com/.a/6a00e0099229e888330147e2cd4785970b-pi)

As far as I was able to find out, nobody has published a research report
on the evolution of the average room temperature in winter throughout
recent history. Today, the American Society of Heating, Refrigerating
and Air-Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE) recommends an indoor winter
temperature between 21 and 23 degrees Celsius (70 to 73.5°F). A [Dutch
report](http://www.ecn.nl/docs/library/report/1997/i97051.pdf) (.pdf, in
dutch) mentions a rise in average winter indoor temperature from 20° C
in 1984 to 21° C in 1992. [David MacKay](www.withouthotair.com) mentions
an average room temperature of 13° Celsius (55°F) in the UK in 1970.

While these fragmentary data are far from sufficient to prove a rise in
indoor temperatures, we can also count on the experience of many people
who are old enough to remember that watching television in a t-shirt
during winter is a relatively recent phenomenon. There seems to be no
doubt that our comfort level has gradually risen because of better
heating systems.

Note that the reduction in energy use for space heating thanks to more
efficient homes was less than 20 percent from 1993 to 2005. Lowering the
thermostat by 2° C (or 4°F) would thus result in energy reduction
comparable to that. Turning down the thermostat from 22° to 18° C would
initiate an energy savings of at least 35 percent. And, as we shall see,
significantly lower indoor temperatures are perfectly possible without
sacrificing comfort.

The body as a heating system

When discussing space heating, we overlook the fact that our own bodies
are heating appliances too. The human body's core temperature is 37° C
(98.6°F), and much of the skin's temperature is around 33° to 34° C
(92°F). Because the temperature of the environment is often lower than
that, our body constantly emits heat into the atmosphere. A small
percentage of this heat is lost through breathing, but the largest part
of heat loss occurs via the skin. To limit this heat transfer from the
skin to the environment, most mammals (and birds) are covered with hair
(or feathers). Humans do not have this protection and this is why we
have resorted to clothing ever since we left our origins in Africa
(where it was hot enough to survive without additional layers of
clothing).

> Insulation of the body is much more energy efficient than insulation
> of the space in which this body finds itself.

Clothing does not produce heating by itself - it only prevents body heat
from escaping into the environment. This happens by warming the layer of
air between skin and clothing. Air is a relatively bad conductor of heat
and therefore a good insulator. Exactly the same technique is applied
when we insulate a home. The only difference is that in the case of a
building we can use more rigid and bulky materials because a building
does not have to move or feel comfortable. Naturally, insulation of the
body is much more energy efficient than insulation of the space in which
this body finds itself. Insulating the body only requires a small layer
of air to be heated, while a heating system has to warm all the air in a
room to achieve the same result.


Thermal properties of clothing: the "clo" unit

The insulating properties of clothing can be expressed in "clo"-units,
where one "clo" equals the thermal insulation required to keep a resting
person (for instance, a couch potato) indefinitely comfortable at a
temperature of 21° Celsius (70° Fahrenheit). The "clo", which is of
course derived from the word "clothes", is not a standard international
unit (the standard international unit of thermal resistance is m²K/W,
where 1 clo corresponds to 0.155 m²K/W), but it has the advantage of
being easily understood: one "clo" is equal to a man dressed in a
three-piece business suit (shirt, trousers, suit jacket) and light
underclothes.

Burton, who defined the clo-unit, wrote in 1946:

*"We found that we could explain even to a General or Admiral, without a
course in physics for which he had neither the time nor patience, that
his uniform had about one clo-unit of thermal insulation, his greatcoat
another one clo-unit, and that together they provided him with a total
of two clo-units."*

In Europe, a similar value was developed called the "tog" (British slang
for clothes), which equals 0.645 clo. Both values can be compared to the
R-value of building insulation materials, where 1 clo equals 0.88 R (or
1 R-value equals 1.137 clo). The clo is more commonly used than the tog,
so we will stick to the American unit here. Clo-values are calculated by
means of a [thermal
manikin](http://www.google.com/images?q=thermal+manikin&oe=utf-8&rls=org.mozilla:nl:official&client=firefox-a&um=1&ie=UTF-8&source=og&sa=N&hl=nl&tab=wi&biw=1024&bih=583).

Maintaining thermal comfort

The clo is an interesting unit because it allows us to precisely
calculate which clothes we have to wear to feel comfortable at any given
indoor temperature. According to the "Encyclopedia of occupational
health and safety", the required clo-value to maintain a neutral thermal
sensation rises to about 2.7 at an indoor temperature of 10° Celsius
(50°F). When the indoor temperature drops to 0° C (32°F), the required
thermal insulation rises to 4 clo. As a rule of thumb, each change of
0.18 clo units compensates for a 1° C change in air temperature
(according to the American Society of Heating, Refrigeration and
Air-Conditioning Engineers - ASHREA).

> One "clo" equals the thermal insulation required to keep a couch
> potato wearing a typical business suit indefinitely comfortable at a
> temperature of 21° Celsius (70° Fahrenheit).

Alternatively, we can calculate the clo-value of any given piece of
clothing and of any given clothing ensemble. The ASHREA, the ISO and
some other research teams have compiled overviews that list hundreds of
individual clothing pieces with their corresponding clo-values (see
sources). A t-shirt with short sleeves has a value of about 0.10 clo,
while a sleeveless undershirt offers about 0.06 clo. Knickers add about
0.20 clo. A short-sleeved shirt has a clo-value of about 0.15 to 0.25,
while a long-sleeved shirt offers about 0.20 to 0.30 clo. Long-sleeved
sweaters offer 0.20 to 0.40 clo, trousers offer 0.25 to 0.35 clo, and a
long skirt or robe 0.22 to 0.77 clo. Briefs add a thermal insulation of
0.05 clo, while socks add 0.04 to 0.10 clo. Long underwear offers 0.20
to 0.35 clo for the upper as well as the lower part. All these values
can simply be added to calculate the total clo-value of a clothing
ensemble. An alternative method is to measure the thickness of a
clothing ensemble: every layer of 2 centimetres results in an
approximate 1.6 clo-value.

Saving energy costs

From these data, it can easily be demonstrated how even slight changes
in clothing insulation can have a profound impact on heating costs and
energy use. A person wearing briefs (0.05 clo), light socks (0.05 clo),
a t-shirt (0.10 clo), a heavy shirt with long sleeves (0.25 clo), a
sweater (0.30 clo) and long pants (0.30 clo) is protected by a total
thermal insulation of 1 clo, meaning that this person will remain
comfortable hanging out in front of the television at a temperature of
21° Celcius (70°F).


without the heavy shirt and sweater, this value drops to 0.55 clo. This
means that watching television wearing just a t-shirt requires an air
temperature of 24° Celcius (75°F) in order to maintain thermal comfort.
This would lead to a rise in energy consumption of 20 to 30 percent.

On the other hand, if this person combines his original ensemble
(including heavy shirt and sweater) with a full set of long underwear,
the clo-value rises up to 1.7, allowing the temperature to drop to about
17° C (63°F), saving 30 to 40 percent on heating costs and energy use
compared to the normal winter outfit, and saving 50 to 70 percent on
heating costs and energy use compared to the outfit with only a t-shirt
on the upper body.

How many articles of clothing can you wear?

When we are talking about common clothing, raising the clo-value of an
ensemble basically comes down to adding more weight in clothes. A
general rule of thumb is that the clo-value equals 0.15 times the
clothing weight in pounds. Wearing 6.6 pounds (3 kg) of garments thus
equals 1 clo. The relationship between thermal comfort and clothing
weight explains why we tend to prefer a higher air temperature to adding
more clothing. If we would like to stay comfortably warm at an indoor
temperature of 0° Celsius (4 clo), we would have to wear 26 pounds (12
kg) of clothes. The US Army found in the 1960s that a maximum of 4 to 5
clo-units could be worn for a man to remain mobile and dexterous enough
for military tasks. Additional clothing weight thus limits our freedom
of movement, and even couch potatoes have to get up from time to time.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

One layer of thermal long underwear allows you to turn down the
thermostat with at least 4° C, saving up to 40% on space heating energy.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


long underwear

However, things have changed. The military, space agencies and the
sports clothing industry have considerably improved the warmth/weight
ratio of clothing over the last decades. This has resulted in a very
diverse and fashionable line of lightweight clothes with high
clo-values. A great deal of this progress is due to the use of new,
synthetic materials. While these have been used for all kinds of
garments (sweaters, pants, jackets), their importance for indoor use is
especially relevant in the case of long underwear. This clothing layer
(which is actually worn in combination with briefs) has the largest
potential to substitute a heating system.

Pumping coefficient

Because it fits tightly around the body, long underwear has an optimal
"pumping coefficient". The pumping coefficient is another factor that
defines clothing insulation, in addition to the clo-value. It refers to
the motion of air produced by wearer movement. Even couch potatoes move
from time to time, and this activity can disturb the insulating air
layer around the body, degrading thermal comfort at least temporarily.


the pumping coefficient is much better for long underwear than for
loose-fitting garments such as ponchos, wide pants, or thick knitted
sweaters, long underwear offers more thermal comfort even when
clo-values are similar. Another factor is the chimney effect: even
without wearer movement, loosely hanging clothes ventilate the trapped
air layers, thus reducing insulation.

Long underwear has more advantages over other clothing options. It does
not hide your body shape and can maintain sex-appeal, a common concern
for both men and women. It can easily be worn underneath normal
clothing. And, last but not least, it can be worn in layers, further
improving upon the insulation value: more air is trapped using several
thin layers than by a single, bulkier layer. According to the US Air
Force Survival Book, one layer of long underwear (long pants +
long-sleeved t-shirt) equals a clo-value of 0.6, while two layers of
long underwear add a clo-value of 1.5. In other words, the clo-value
more than doubles by using only two layers. Combine this outfit with a
typical business suit (or a similar, more comfortable clothing
ensemble), and thermal insulation rises to 2.5 clo, enough to keep a
couch potato indefinitely comfortable at a temperature of only 12.7°
Celcius (55°F) - far below the common indoor temperatures of today. This
clothing ensemble could yield a reduction in energy use for space
heating of up to 80 percent.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

With two layers of thermal underwear, the insulation value more than
doubles. It is perfectly possible to maintain thermal comfort at
temperatures around or even below 10°C (50°F)

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Unfortunately, the clo-values of modern thermal underwear have not been
listed in well-documented overviews, as is the case for more common
clothing options. Nevertheless, fragmentary information points to
considerably higher clo-values than those for traditional long
underwear. Calculations by well-informed amateur hikers (see for
instance
[here](http://www.backpackinglight.com/cgi-bin/backpackinglight/xdpy/forum_thread/9378/index.html))
show clo-values that are at least double those of the long underwear
mentioned by the US Air Force (for instance, 0.66 clo for the upper
piece alone). This would mean that the same thermal comfort could be
achieved using only one layer of long underwear plus the equivalent of a
winter business suit (2.5 clo at 12.7°C), or that using two layers plus
the suit could bring the comfort level for a resting person down to a
temperature of 0°C (wearing 4 clo of clothing).


Another indication for the additional energy savings potential of
high-tech long underwear are the clo-values of different materials.
According to the "Handbook of technical textiles", the warmth/weight
ratios of pile fabrics like polyester and acrylic are 2.5 to 8 times
higher than those of woven and knitted fabrics like wool or cotton
(materials used for traditional long underwear). Quilt battings like
Thinsulate offer warmth/weight ratios that are 13 to 17 times those of
cotton and wool.

Synthetic or natural materials?

It may sound strange to promote the use of synthetic clothing on a blog
like Low-tech Magazine. However, both natural and synthetic materials
have their advantages and drawbacks, and both can be a sustainable
choice - even though synthetic clothes are made from fossil fuels. This
is especially true when the clothing is used as a substitute for a
heating system; the energy saved by lowering the thermostat is much
larger than the energy required to manufacture the garments. Indeed,
these high-insulating garments demonstrate how valuable fossil fuels are
as a material, and how foolish we are to simply burn them.

Synthetic long underwear not only has a higher insulation value than
natural materials, it also lasts much longer, it is easy on the skin
(many people can't tolerate wool) and it can be very cheap. The main
drawbacks of synthetic underclothing are their high fire susceptibility
and their tendency to attract dirt. Synthetic thermal underwear should
be washed regularly - a process that consumes energy. This is less an
issue for indoor use than for outdoor sports, because couch potatoes
don't produce sweat. Moreover, synthetic clothes dry very easily, which
means that there is no need to put them in a dryer after washing. Of
course, clothes can also be washed in a pedal-powered washing machine,
and the hot water could come from a solar boiler, eliminating fossil
energy use altogether (and keeping you more than warm enough while doing
the laundry).

That being said, synthetic clothes are not a necessity. Even the use of
long underwear made from natural materials like cotton and wool has the
potential for considerable energy savings. Cotton might have a
relatively low insulation value, but a full layer of cotton long
underwear will still add at least 0.4 clo to your thermal comfort -
enough to lower the indoor temperature by 2.5° C and save more than 20
percent on heating bills. Using wool can more than double this potential
to about 1 clo for a full layer of long underwear (allowing for an
indoor temperature reduction of more than 6° C). Wool made a comeback as
a material used for hiking and mountaineering clothes in the mid-1990s,
at which point [Icebreaker](http://www.icebreaker.com/site/index.html)
was the first manufacturer to position itself in the market with woollen
thermic underwear.


company uses wool from the merino sheep in New Zealand, which produce
some of the finest and softest wools available.
[Patagonia](http://www.patagonia.com/) also offers a series of merino
wool underwear, and several European manufacturers
([Mammut](http://www.mammut.ch/), [Woolpower](http://www.woolpower.se/)
and [Helly Hansen](http://www.hellyhansen.com/)) mix merino wool with
synthetic materials. This leads to more durable clothing - wool wears
out much faster then synthetic materials. An important advantage of wool
over synthetic (and over other natural) materials is that it maintains a
good smell for a very long time. Regular washing is not required. The
largest disadvantage of merino-wool is the price: you won't find a full
set of long underwear for less than 200 euro. But again: this investment
will quickly payfor itself if it allows you to lower the thermostat.

Thermal comfort: more than clothes & air temperature

Thermal comfort is not just dependent on air temperature and the thermal
insulation properties of clothing alone. In fact, more than a dozen
other factors - both personal and environmental - play a role. However,
environmental factors are of much less relevance for indoor thermal
comfort than for outdoor use. Indoor clothing does not have to be
windproof, waterproof or be able to wick away perspiration.

After air temperature, the environmental factors influencing thermal
comfort are the mean radiant temperature, relative humidity and air
movement. The last two are included in the clo-value, which is defined
in an environment with a relative humidity of less than 50 percent and
an air speed of 6 metres per minute (stagnant air). Wind has a profound
influence on the thermal insulation of clothing when we are outdoors
because it disturbs the insulating air layer between skin and clothing.
Indoors, air movement is mostly a negligible factor, although it should
be kept in mind that any draft can lower the thermal comfort of a
clothing ensemble.

Radiant heat is another major influence on thermal comfort when we are
outdoors. The radiant heat of the sun can make you feel hot even when
air temperature is low. Indoors the influence of radiant heat is much
less. Nevertheless, it can have a positive influence on indoor thermal
comfort, because sunlight that enters the room will be absorbed by walls
and furniture, and gradually released. This is especially so in passive
houses and in homes heated by a [tile
stove]({filename}/posts/tile-stoves.md), where
radiant heat is an important factor in thermal comfort.

> Environmental factors are of much less relevance for indoor thermal
> comfort than for outdoor use. Indoor clothing does not have to be
> windproof, waterproof or be able to wick away perspiration.


Along with the clo-value and the pumping coefficient, the third factor
defining the thermal insulation of clothing is the "permeability index".
The thermal properties of clothing drastically degrade when they become
wet, either by sweating or by external moisture. This can be very
dangerous if you are physically active in a cold outdoor climate because
during a resting period your body can quickly lose heat, possibly
leading to hypothermia and death. But of course, the permeability index
is not of any importance for indoor couch potatoes: they don't sweat.
Indoors, rain is not a concern either.

Human activity indoors

The most significant factor influencing thermal comfort - even more
important than air temperature and clothing - is human activity or body
heat production (the metabolic rate). For instance, while it takes 12
clo-units to keep a resting person warm at an extremely low temperature
of minus 40° C, this comes down to only 4 clo when this person is
walking, and to only 1.25 clo when this person is running at 16 km/h.
One of the most obvious reasons why our forefathers could bear lower
indoor temperatures, was that they were more physically active than many
of us.

It is telling that one defence mechanism of the body against cold is to
increase its heat production. This happens first by muscle tensing and
ultimately by shivering, which can increase body heat production by up
to five times (from 100 watts at rest to about 500 watts). The metabolic
rate also has a profound influence at non-extreme temperatures. While a
resting person (like a couch potato) requires a thermal insulation of
2.7 clo at an indoor temperature of 10° Celsius (50°F), this is lowered
to only 1.7 clo when this person is engaged in very light activity (like
typing, drawing or having an animated conversation). In this case, the
combination of long underwear with the equivalent of a typical business
suit suffices to keep him or her warm. As a general rule of thumb, each
increase of 30 watts in heat production allows the comfort temperature
to go down by about 1.7°C. On the other hand, when sleeping instead of
just resting, the required thermal insulation approximately doubles -
for instance to 2 clo at a temperature of 20° Celsius. This is why
sleeping bags can have thermal insulation of more than 10 clo-units.

Personal factors other than clothing or activity can also contribute to
thermal comfort. Men seem to tolerate lower temperatures than women, and
both small children and the elderly need higher temperatures to sustain
their thermal comfort. Research has shown that - even regardless of age
and gender - different people prefer slightly different ideal
temperatures. Furthermore, people also get used to prevailing
temperatures, leading to clearly observable cultural differences. The
clo-values given for different indoor air temperatures are thus not more
than guidelines - personal differences will occur.

Hands and feet

The clo-value refers to the whole body surface and thus includes heat
transfer by exposed body parts (head and hands, in some cases also arms,
legs, feet or torso). Both the clothing insulation and the skin coverage
are important determinants of heat loss. In real life the two are
correlated in the sense that winter clothing not only insulates better,
but also covers a larger proportion of the body than summer wear.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The most significant factor influencing thermal comfort - even more
important than air temperature and clothing - is body heat production

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Hands and feet are always the first victims when thermal discomfort sets
in. Together with the head and the neck, they lose more heat than other
parts of the body. However, it is important to note that if the body as
a whole is kept warm enough, hands and feet will not be greatly affected
by lower indoor temperatures. Cooling down the extremities is yet
another defence reaction of the body if the core temperature falls. This
thermoregulatory mechanism - "vasoconstriction" - reduces the blood flow
to the skin, improving skin insulation and thus limiting heat loss. It
happens all over the body, but due to their small mass and large surface
area, vasoconstriction has the most profound effect on the hands and the
feet.

At extreme cold temperatures, vasoconstriction can save your life -
though it might cost you some fingers and toes, or worse. In order to
maintain body core temperature (which is vital for survival), the body
will sacrifice hands, feet and nose first, followed by the limbs.
Because vasoconstriction only occurs when the core body temperature
falls, it won't happen if you're dressed warmly enough. While insulating
your neck and feet will greatly improve your thermal comfort, there is
no need to wear gloves or caps indoors. In fact, it doesn't matter very
much which parts of your body you choose to insulate - the important
thing is to limit total heat loss so that the body core temperature
remains stable. For instance, if you prefer to wear a high-insulating
cap indoors, you can pretty much forget about all the rest and be
comfortable in relatively light clothes at low temperatures.


Life without heating?

Of course, this article is not a plea to get rid of heating systems
altogether, although in some climates this is clearly possible - saving
not only heating costs but also the instalment of a heating system and
other investments. However, for many of us, a heating system remains a
necessity, if only because temperatures regularly drop below freezing
point (water pipes would freeze over, and keeping full thermal comfort
by clothing alone will become difficult). But even then, thermal
underclothing could lead to an important reduction in energy consumption
by making it possible to lower the average indoor temperature a few
degrees and to shorten the heating season by a couple of months.

The energy savings potential of clothing is so large that it cannot be
ignored - though in fact this is exactly what is happening now. This
does not mean that home insulation and efficient heating systems should
not be encouraged. All three paths should be pursued, but improving
clothing insulation is obviously the cheapest, easiest and fastest way.
One final disadvantage is that visitors not wearing thermal
underclothing will feel uncomfortable at your place, even if you and
your family are feeling all right. Offering casual visitors an extra
layer of thermal underwear might not always be an option.

Kris De Decker (edited by Rachel Meyer)

-   Pictures of people wearing thermal long underwear:
    [Icebreaker](http://www.icebreaker.com/site/index.html).
-   Pictures of thermal clothing:
    [Patagonia](http://www.patagonia.com/),
    [Woolpower](http://www.woolpower.se/) and [Helly
    Hansen](http://www.hellyhansen.com/).
-   Last picture: a "[union
    suit](http://www.oaknyc.com/men/new-items/red-union-suit.html?enlarged#2)",
    the predecessor of thermal underwear.
-   Thanks to Tim Joye.

Related articles:

-   [Restoring the old way of warming: heating people, not
    places]({filename}/posts/heating-people-not-spaces.md)
-   [Fruit walls: urban solar farming in the
    1600s]({filename}/posts/fruit-walls-urban-farming.md)
-   [The revenge of the circulating
    fan]({filename}/posts/circulating-fans-air-conditioning.md)
-   [The solar
    envelope]({filename}/posts/solar-oriented-cities-1-the-solar-envelope.md):
    how to heat and cool cities without fossil fuels
-   [Heat your clothes, not your
    house]({filename}/posts/heat-your-clothes-not-your-house.md):
    electrically heated clothing could save massive amounts of energy
-   [Radiant & conductive heating
    sources]({filename}/posts/radiant-and-conductive-heating-systems.md)


### Sources

-   "[Handbook on clothing: biomedical effects of military clothing and
    equipment
    systems](http://www.scribd.com/doc/35512680/Handbook-on-clothing-2nd-Ed)",
    second edition, Ralph F. Goldman & Bernhard Kampmann, 2007.
-   "[A comprehensive data base for estimating clothing
    insulation](http://rp.ashrae.biz/page/RP411.pdf)" (.pdf), ASHRAE,
    E.A. McCullough, 1984
-   "[US Air Force Survival
    Book](http://books.google.es/books?id=uYz4ODJ5XhsC&pg=PA590&dq=US+Air+Force+Survival+Book&hl=es&ei=PzRpTYidK4uo8QPB6ZXyBw&sa=X&oi=book_result&ct=result&resnum=2&ved=0CDMQ6AEwAQ#v=onepage&q=US%20Air%20Force%20Survival%20Book&f=false)",
    The United States Air Force, 2008
-   "[The best clothing combinations for backpacking or
    hiking?](http://www.backpackinglight.com/cgi-bin/backpackinglight/xdpy/forum_thread/9378/index.html)",
    Backpackinglight.com
-   "[Some like it
    hot](http://www.homeenergy.org/archive/hem.dis.anl.gov/eehem/94/940312.html)",
    Alan Meyer, Home Energy, 1994
-   "[Handbook of technical
    textiles](http://www.scribd.com/doc/21378116/Handbook-of-Technical-Textiles)",
    A.R. Horrocks & S.C. Anand, 2000
-   "[Climate and
    clothing](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1815343/pdf/procrsmed00311-0085.pdf)"
    (.pdf), Lieutenant-Colonel J.M. Adam, 1969
-   "[Encyclopedia of occupational health and
    safety](http://books.google.es/books?id=Ceuq9P4hLJMC&printsec=frontcover&dq=%22Encyclopedia+of+occupational+health+and+safety,+volumen+2%22&hl=es&ei=tjVpTbfeEo-v8QP3qZHyBw&sa=X&oi=book_result&ct=result&resnum=1&ved=0CC8Q6AEwAA#v=onepage&q&f=false)",
    Jeanne Mager Stellman, 1998
-   "[Clothing and modern human behaviour: prehistoric Tasmania as a
    case
    study](http://findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_hb1398/is_3_42/ai_n29383509/)",
    Ian Gilligan, 2007
-   "[HVAC Handbook - thermal comfort by
    INNOVA](http://www.scribd.com/doc/26886870/HVAC-Handbook-Thermal-Comfort-by-INNOVA)",
-   "[Essentials of exercise physiology, volumen
    one](http://books.google.es/books?id=L4aZIDbmV3oC&printsec=frontcover&dq=Essentials+of+exercise+physiology&source=bl&ots=WkvZv8Jh-M&sig=ztM0G3L8j2a39MMLICVV6095CpI&hl=es&ei=hDBpTfW6Dseu8QOx5KDyBw&sa=X&oi=book_result&ct=result&resnum=4&ved=0CEEQ6AEwAw#v=onepage&q&f=false)",
    William D. McArdle, 2000
-   "[ISO 9920 international
    database:](http://www.iso.org/iso/catalogue_detail.htm?csnumber=39257)[Ergonomics
    of the thermal environment&mdash;Estimation of thermal insulation and
    water vapour resistance of a clothing
    ensemble](http://www.iso.org/iso/catalogue_detail.htm?csnumber=39257)".
    (2007). This seems to be a more recent list of the clo-values for
    common clothing pieces. I did not consult this document because I
    find it too pricey (+ 200 dollars). If anybody has access to it,
    comments are always welcome.
-   "[Temperature control fabrics, 2007
    edition](http://www.researchandmarkets.com/reports/544636/temperature_control_fabrics_2007_edition)",
    Research & Markets. This report might have more accurate data on the
    clo-values of modern long underwear. I did not consult it because of
    the high price (325 euro).
-   "[Oxford dictionary of Sports Science &
    Medicine](http://books.google.es/books?id=pO45AQAAIAAJ&dq=%22Oxford+dictionary+of+Sports+Science+%26+Medicine%22&hl=es&ei=cTVpTajpMJGr8AOfy_nyBw&sa=X&oi=book_result&ct=result&resnum=1&ved=0CDUQ6AEwAA)",
    2006

