Title: Why the electric car has no (wireless) future
Date: 2008-01-21 19:56
Author: Kris De Decker
Category: Low-tech Solutions
Slug: bumper-cars-o-1
Status: published


electric car is not a technology of the future, but from the past.

The electric car is 170 years old. This may sound surprising, but e-cars
predate automobiles with a combustion engine. They were driven out of
the market in the beginning of the 20th century because petrol engines
had significantly better mileage. One century later, the electric car
still faces the same – fundamental – problems. Furthermore, the need for
batteries makes them eco-unfriendly by nature. The only possible green
future for electric cars is a *wired* future: hooked up to the overhead
lines, like trolleybuses and bumper cars.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div>

"Like electric cars, the environmental score of a trolleybus depends on
the way the electricity was generated. However, a trolleybus does not
face the problem of energy storage."

</div>

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

src="http://pagead2.googlesyndication.com/pagead/show\_ads.js"&gt;  

Car manufacturers want us to believe that the automobile will soon
become a completely harmless technology, comparable to [a
bicycle]({filename}/posts/get-rid-of-cars-ride-a-bicycle.md)
or a pair of roller skates - because the car of the near future will run
on electricity. Hybrid cars – which combine an electromotor with a
combustion engine – are already a hype and fully electric cars are not
far behind. Unfortunately, most electricity is produced by means of
fossil fuels. That means electric cars will not lower traffic emissions,
apart from doing so in the statistics: the air pollution and the CO2
that are now attributed to road traffic, will then be filed under energy
production.



A power plant has a higher efficiency than a car’s engine, and an
electric motor has a higher efficiency than a combustion engine. Herein
lies a potential advantage for the environment, even if the electricity
needed to power electric cars is generated by fossil fuels. And let’s be
optimistic for once and assume that we will have a 100 percent green
electricity infrastructure in 10 or 20 years time (let’s call that
hugely optimistic, since it’s already an enormous challenge to green the
existing infrastructure and a massive introduction of electric cars
means [we have to build many more power
plants]({filename}/posts/fast-charging-electric-cars-off-peak-grid.md)).

6,000 batteries

So, then, we have green cars, right? Alas, no. The electric car has a
serious environmental drawback compared to a car running on a combustion
engine: the battery. The ‘fuel tank’ of an electric car consists of
hundreds of connected batteries, each of them comparable to the battery
of a mobile phone (the [Tesla Roadster](http://www.teslamotors.com/), an
electric sports car, has more than 6,000 of them). After some years,
they all have to be replaced, and already before that time there is a
reduction in storage capacity.

The environmental profit gained by a higher efficiency (or by green
electricity) will be negated completely by the massive amount of
batteries required. Batteries have to be manufactured, and that process
is [very
energy-intensive]({filename}/posts/the-status-quo-of-electric-cars-better-batteries-same-range.md)
and environmentally harmful. Batteries also have to be discarded or
recycled - both processes again require extra energy and inflict
environmental harm.

[](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2008/01/bumper-cars-o-1.html#more)

Mileage

Batteries are the flaw of electric cars, and not only when considering
the environment. Electric cars are not yet a reality because of the
limited mileage of their ‘fuel tanks’. At best, an electric car can
drive [100
miles]({filename}/posts/the-status-quo-of-electric-cars-better-batteries-same-range.md).
After that, the car has to be plugged in for hours. There are several
possible ways to get around that. We could set up a system where a
driver can swap batteries at a fuel station, or even a system where a
driver could swap cars.

Another way to improve mileage is to make cars [lighter and
slower]({filename}/posts/racing-on-solar.md) –
as opposed to the present trend, with cars getting heavier and faster
year after year. In its present form and use, however, the car is
inconceivable without the combustion motor. And that’s nothing new. The
same fundamental problems were the reason that electric and hybrid cars
were driven out of the market at the beginning of the 20th century.

170 years old

It may sound surprising, but the first electric car was invented around
1835, half a century earlier than the first gasoline powered car. In the
late 19th and early 20th century electric cars were more popular than
gasoline (and steam) powered cars (see this [overview of early
electrics](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/overview-of-early-electric-cars.html)).
In 1899, an electric car was the first to break the speed barrier of 100
km/h (62 mph). The “[Jamais
Contente](http://www.e-mobile.ch/pdf/2005/Fact-Sheet_LaJamaisContente_FW.pdf)”, as it was called, weighed 1,500 kilograms and the two
batteries made up half of that weight. In 1916, the first hybrid car was
invented, equipped with both an internal combustion engine and an
electric motor. The Toyota Prius is nothing new.

The explanation for the success of the electric car was the fact that it
did not require a manual effort to start the engine, and that gear
changes were not required. Gasoline powered cars needed the use of a
hand crank to start, and the need to shift gears made driving more
difficult. Moreover, since most driving was done over short distances in
town, as elsewhere there were no good roads, the limited mileage was not
a problem. The expansion of the road network, however, and the invention
of the starter motor for gasoline cars, made an end to the success of
the electric car. Around 1930, it disappeared almost completely. It
resurged only in the sixties and seventies, when environmental concerns
arose.

Trolleybus & trolleytruck

However, only the electric passenger car disappeared. Around the same
time that the popularity of the electric car started to decline,
networks of
[trolleybuses]({filename}/posts/trolleytrucks-trolleybuses-cargotrams.md)
appeared in cities around the world. A trolleybus has an electric motor,
but it needs no battery since it gets its electricity from the overhead
cables – like an electric train or a tram (streetcar). It is cheaper
than a tram because there is no need for rails. It is also slightly more
flexible – a badly parked car will not stop it.

Trolleybus lines were built all around the world, and [in 360 cities
they are still operating
today]({filename}/posts/trolleytrucks-trolleybuses-cargotrams.md).
Although much less widespread than trolleybuses,
[trolleytrucks]({filename}/posts/trolleytrucks-trolleybuses-cargotrams.md)
were used too (especially in Russia). They made use of the existing
trolleybus infrastructure (like this van in
[Barcelona](http://dewi.ca/trains/barcelon/service.html), *picture
below*) or they used a specially built infrastructure (like the line in
[Ukraine](http://englishrussia.com/?p=736), *picture above*).



In most countries, trolleybuses disappeared in the fifties and the
sixties to make way for the diesel bus, which was cheaper (and more
flexible). The technology, however, is very noteworthy. Like electric
cars, the environmental score of a trolleybus depends on the way the
electricity was generated. However, a trolleybus (just like a tram or an
electric train) does not face the problem of energy storage. Therefore,
the problem with the electric car is not that it’s electric, but that
it’s *wireless*.

Trolleycars?


it be possible to design *wired* electric passenger cars? The only wired
passenger cars that exist today are the bumper cars on the fun fair.
Technically, it’s perfectly possible to build a similar widespread
network for wired passenger cars, based on the technology of bumper cars
or trolleybuses. There is no new high-tech needed for that. In fact, the
basic concept of bumper cars [was originally
designed](http://www.lusseautoscooters.com/thebeach.html)[as a method of
transporting goods and
people](http://www.lusseautoscooters.com/thebeach.html).

However, it would mean overhead lines or grids as far as you can see, if
we would want to keep the absolute freedom of movement of the passenger
car. Such a system would be easier to apply on highways, but that would
mean that all cars have to maintain the same speed and that they are not
able to pass one another – unless the grid system of bumper cars is
copied.

Either way, such systems raise the question why we do not use trams or
trains instead.

[](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2008/01/bumper-cars-o-1.html#more)Conceptual
problem?

The technological problems that electric cars have faced for more than a
century now, compared to the smooth operation of electric trains, trams,
trolleybuses and bumper cars, may mean that the wireless electric car
simply has no future. Its problem might not be technological, but
conceptual.

Certainly, better batteries will improve the mileage and the [charging
time of electric
cars]({filename}/posts/fast-charging-electric-cars-off-peak-grid.md),
but it’s hard to see [how they can do that without harming the
environment]({filename}/posts/nanotechnolog-1.md).
While the sole reason for the existence of electric cars today *is* that
they are better for the environment. © Kris De Decker (edited by Vincent
Grosjean) / the original title of the article was "Bumper cars on the
highway"

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
   
   
   
   
 ------------------------------------------------------------------------

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Related articles :


[]({filename}/posts/trolleytrucks-trolleybuses-cargotrams.md)

[Trolleybuses and
trolleytrucks]({filename}/posts/trolleytrucks-trolleybuses-cargotrams.md)
: electric transport for a bargain

[The status quo of electric
cars]({filename}/posts/the-status-quo-of-electric-cars-better-batteries-same-range.md)
: better batteries, same range

[Cleantech from the 1940s: the Citroen
2CV]({filename}/posts/citroen-2cv.md)

[The age of
speed]({filename}/posts/speed-energy.md) : how
to reduce global fuel consumption by 75 percent

[Overview of early electric
cars](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/overview-of-early-electric-cars.html)
(1895-1925): pictures and specifications

[Who killed the electric
grid]({filename}/posts/fast-charging-electric-cars-off-peak-grid.md)?
Fast-charging cars need power peaks of 150,000 watts

[Wood gas
vehicles]({filename}/posts/wood-gas-cars.md) :
firewood in the fuel tank

[Water powered cable
trains]({filename}/posts/water-powered-cable-trains.md)
: up and down the mountains without energy

[Trolley canal
boats]({filename}/posts/trolley-canal-boats.md)

[Life without
airplanes]({filename}/posts/ocean-liners.md)

Pictures:

[Trolleybuses in North
America](http://home.cc.umanitoba.ca/%7Ewyatt/etb-systems.html)

[Trolleybuses in South America](http://www.tramz.com/index.html)

[The history of the bumper
car](http://www.lusseautoscooters.com/thebeach.html)

[The history of the electric
car](http://inventors.about.com/library/weekly/aacarselectrica.htm)

[Trolleytrucks in Russia](http://englishrussia.com/?p=736)

[Trolleytrucks in
Barcelona](http://dewi.ca/trains/barcelon/service.html)

Subscribe via
[email](http://www.feedburner.com/fb/a/emailverifySubmit?feedId=1685209&loc=en_US)
or
[feed](http://feeds2.feedburner.com/typepad/krisdedecker/lowtechmagazineenglish).
Follow us on [Twitter](http://twitter.com/lowtechmagazine) or
[Facebook](http://www.facebook.com/group.php?gid=202749795069).

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------[-](http://www.lowtechmagazine.be/2009/03/elektrische-auto-snelle-oplaadtijden-elektriciteitsnetwerk.html)

  

  

  

