Title: The Revenge of the Circulating Fan
Date: 2014-09-10 14:00
Author: Kris De Decker
Category: Low-tech Solutions
Slug: circulating-fans-air-conditioning
Status: published



The steadfast rotating fan has been employed to keep people cool since
the eighteenth century, and it remains highly effective, requiring much
less energy and providing more comfort than air-conditioning. Cooling
people by increasing local airflow is at least ten times more energy
efficient than refrigerating the air in a given space, and it also adds
the benefit of a personally controlled thermal environment.

If used in combination with air-conditioning, fans could lower energy
use by 30-70%, even in incredibly hot climates or during heat waves.
Circulating fans, which have become very energy efficient in their
design, can be readily and cheaply applied in both new and existing
buildings. Recent changes in international comfort standards have paved
the way for their comeback.

Picture: the 152 cm diameter [Haiku ceiling
fan](http://www.bigassfans.com/products/haiku/) from Big Ass Fans. Power
consumption is 2-8 watts for normal range of use.


Compressor-based cooling or air-conditioning (AC) puts increasing
pressure on electric grids worldwide. In the USA, the birthplace of the
technology, AC accounts for approximately 20% of year-round electricity
consumption by American households, and 15% of total electricity use.
\[[1](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/09/circulating-fans-air-conditioning.html#notes)\]
The widespread use of AC explains in large part why Americans use so
much more electricity than Europeans: AC electricity use by an American
household equals 60% of all electricity used by the average European
household.
\[[2](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/09/circulating-fans-air-conditioning.html#notes)\]

Except for the few temperate regions on the West Coast, air conditioners
are now standard in most American homes.
\[[3](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/09/circulating-fans-air-conditioning.html#notes)\]
While only 12% of American households had AC in 1960, this number
increased to 87% in 2009.
\[[1](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/09/circulating-fans-air-conditioning.html#notes)\]\[[3](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/09/circulating-fans-air-conditioning.html#notes)\]
Furthermore, the average air-conditioned home consumed 37% more energy
for cooling in 2005 than it did in 1993 – in spite of a 28% increase in
AC energy efficiency. Part of the increase in energy use is due to the
switch from window units (which cool one room) to central
air-conditioning (which cool the whole building), and in part to the
growing cubic footage of houses and apartments.
\[[1](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/09/circulating-fans-air-conditioning.html#notes)\]

Peak Power Demand

Even worse is the impact of air-conditioning on peak power demand.
Obviously, the use of AC is not spread equally throughout the year, but
concentrated in the summer months. On very hot days, many
air-conditioning units are set to a maximum position, and as a
consequence demand for electricity spikes. Hundreds of American power
plants and a great many miles of transmission and distribution lines are
needed on average only two or three days per year, while they sit idle
for the rest of the time. Peak power demand is growing faster than
average power demand, and compressor-based cooling is an important
reason for this.
\[[4](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/09/circulating-fans-air-conditioning.html#notes)\]
\[[5](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/09/circulating-fans-air-conditioning.html#notes)\]

When we look at greenhouse gas emissions, another problem comes to
light. AC not only produces emissions originating from electricity
production. There is also the leakage of refrigerants, which are gases
that&mdash;although they remain in the atmosphere for a shorter time --
have a much higher global warming potential than CO2. The irony is that
the substantial greenhouse gas emissions from air-conditioning bring us
hotter summers, which in turn stimulates the use of air-conditioning.
Another feedback loop is the “heat-canyon effect”: by blowing warm air
out from buildings, AC heats up the streets, in its turn raising the
need for more AC.
\[[1](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/09/circulating-fans-air-conditioning.html#notes)\]
\[[6](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/09/circulating-fans-air-conditioning.html#notes)\]

> AC electricity use by an American household equals 60% of all
> electricity used by the average European household

While the USA remains the absolute champion of air-conditioning, the
technology is also gaining importance in the rest of the world. For
example, between 1997 and 2007, the number of Chinese households owning
air-conditioning tripled, with the annual number sold reaching more than
20 million.
\[[1](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/09/circulating-fans-air-conditioning.html#notes)\]
By 2020, energy consumption for air-conditioning in India is projected
to grow almost tenfold compared to its 2005 level.
\[[1](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/09/circulating-fans-air-conditioning.html#notes)\]
Even in the temperate climate of Europe, AC is advancing, especially in
the commercial sector. For example, in the UK, based on currents trends,
40% of commercial floor space will have AC by 2020, compared to 10% in
1994.
\[[6](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/09/circulating-fans-air-conditioning.html#notes)\]

The Historical Evolution of the Fan

Throughout history, humans have used energy to keep themselves warm
during the winter months. The use of energy to keep cool in summer,
however, is a relatively recent phenomenon. Before the advent of
air-conditioning in the first half of the twentieth century, buildings
in hot climates were designed for natural ventilation (see further), and
people adapted to the heat by changing their routines. However,
air-conditioning was not the first technology that used energy for
cooling: circulating fans predate AC by decades.

For most of history, fans were human-powered. Hand-held fans were used
by ancient Egyptians, Babylonians, Persians, Chinese, Greeks and Romans.
Most often, fans were waved by servants in order to cool their masters
and to scare away insects. The folding fan, which people used to cool
themselves, was invented by the Japanese in the ninth century, and
introduced to the west by Portuguese sailors during the Renaissance.
\[[7](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/09/circulating-fans-air-conditioning.html#notes)\]



A remotely operated punkah, 1863.

The first remotely operated fans were “pankha” or “punkah”, developed in
the 1500s in India and the Middle East. These rectangular canvas covered
frames, suspended overhead, were waved back and forth by servants
(called “pankwallah” or “punkawallah”), who pulled a rope against a
counterweight while seated outside the room.
\[[10](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/09/circulating-fans-air-conditioning.html#notes)\]

Rotating fans appeared in the eighteenth century, and these were
initially human-powered, too. During the same century, however,
[clockwork fans](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0vKZz1wy8x4) appeared,
driven by a [wind-up
mechanism](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Dz9vxKFjxEc). In the
nineteenth century, fans were powered by waterwheels, steam engines, or
[small water turbines running on tap water from the town
mains]({filename}/posts/power-from-the-tap-water-motors.md).
The first electrically powered circulating fan appeared in the USA in
1882.

How to Keep People Cool?

The four environmental factors that determine human thermal comfort are
air temperature, air velocity, air humidity, and radiant temperature.
Each of these variables can be manipulated to cool (or heat) people.

Air-conditioning lowers air temperature and (if necessary) air humidity.
A lower air temperature increases heat loss from the body through
convection, while a lower air humidity increases heat loss from the body
through evaporation of moisture from the skin (which also occurs when we
are not sweating). Circulating fans increase air velocity, which
accelerates heat loss from the skin through convection and evaporation.
Heat loss through evaporation increases with the square of the air
velocity.
\[[8](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/09/circulating-fans-air-conditioning.html#notes)\]



Moving air. Photo credit: [Amancay
Maahs](https://www.flickr.com/photos/amanky/426137424).

Radiant cooling&mdash;another method of keeping humans comfortable&mdash;works
by lowering the temperature of the surfaces in a space. This is achieved
by circulating cool water through plastic tubes in building surfaces,
such as walls, floors, ceilings, or in modular panels. Radiant systems
cool people by increasing heat loss from the body through radiation, but
there is also an indirect, limited, and delayed decrease of air
temperature. This is not so in the case of circulating fans, which have
no effect on air temperature.
\[[8](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/09/circulating-fans-air-conditioning.html#notes)\]
Either way, both circulating fans and radiant cooling systems can
provide thermal comfort at higher air temperatures during hot
conditions.

Why AC is Inefficient

Air-conditioning is the least energy efficient way of cooling people,
because it implies that all the air in an enclosed space needs to be
refrigerated (and, if necessary, dehumidified) in order to cool the
occupants. The larger the space and the fewer the people within it, the
more energy it will take to cool each occupant. Like air-conditioning,
circulating fans cool people by encouraging heat loss from the body
through convection and evaporation. However, unlike air-conditioning,
moving air around requires much less energy than refrigerating it.

> Moving air around requires much less energy than refrigerating it.
> Moreover, the cooling effect of circulating fans can be applied
> locally and has immediate effect

Moreover, the cooling effect of circulating fans can be applied locally
and has immediate effect. Fans circulate air around the body, while
leaving the air in unoccupied parts of the space unaffected. Likewise,
it is not necessary to keep the air circulating when nobody is around.
Upon entering a room, turning on a fan has an immediate effect.
Air-conditioning, on the other hand, needs time to cool down a space. As
a consequence, a space will often be air-conditioned even when nobody is
around, in order to provide immediate comfort when somebody enters it.


desk fan by Westinghouse. [Wikipedia
Commons](http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Westinghouse_Goodness.JPG).

Like circulating fans, radiant cooling is much more efficient than
air-conditioning, because there is no need to refrigerate the air.
Furthermore, radiation is often the primary method of heat exchange
between the body and the indoor environment.
\[[9](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/09/circulating-fans-air-conditioning.html#notes)\]
However, compared to circulating fans, radiant cooling has two
disadvantages. Firstly, like air-conditioning, it's slow acting, which
means that it needs to be operated continuously in order to offer
immediate comfort. Secondly, it's considerably more expensive than fans
and it's not as easy to install in existing buildings.

Another disadvantage of air-conditioning is that it requires an
airtight, enclosed space in order to keep the refrigerated air inside.
Circulating fans and radiant cooling systems, on the other hand, work
indoors as well as outdoors. They can be combined with natural
ventilation, taking advantage of an additional, free cooling effect when
it is available. Both cooling systems appear in nature: wind is the
natural counterpart of a fan, while cold surfaces such as those of seas,
lakes, or caves are the counterparts of radiant cooling surfaces in a
building.

The Cooling Potential of Circulating Fans

The cooling effect of circulating fans is substantial. An air speed of
roughly 1 m/s is capable of offsetting a 3°C (5.4°F) increase in indoor
temperature, while an air speed of 3 m/s has a cooling effect of roughly
7°C (12.6°F). \[10\] For comparison, these modest air velocities
correspond with an outdoor wind speed of Beaufort 1 and 2, respectively.
The lower the air humidity, the higher the cooling effect of a given air
speed. Fan configuration is another important variable, because the
airflow from fans usually reaches only certain parts of the body
surface.

Ceiling fans produce the least cooling for a given air speed, as they
affect a smaller part of the body. However, they have other advantages:
they don't require floor or desk space and they can have very large
diameters, which enables them to cool a larger area. Floor fans aimed at
the back or the chest provide the most cooling, while the cooling effect
of desk fans sits in between these extremes – the face appears to be
very sensitive to the cooling effect of air movement.
\[[12](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/09/circulating-fans-air-conditioning.html#notes)\]


Ceiling Fan. Photo Credit: [Wikipedia
Commons](http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Big_Ass_Fans_Powerfoil_X2.0_Plus_Fan.png).

In recent years, several studies have calculated the cooling effect of
different fan configurations at various air velocities and relative
humidities. A 2013 study using ceiling fans found that subjects were
comfortable up to 30°C (86°F) and 60% relative humidity with an air
speed of 1.2 m/s, and up to 30°C and 80% relative humidity with an air
speed of 1.6 m/s. At 60% relative humidity, subjects would be
comfortable at temperatures higher than 30°C, but these conditions were
not investigated. During the experiment, which took place in a climate
chamber, subjects were wearing light clothing (0.5
[clo]({filename}/posts/body-insulation-thermal-underwear.md))
and performed light activity (for example, computer work at a desk).
\[[12](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/09/circulating-fans-air-conditioning.html#notes)\]

> Recent studies have shown that people can be comfortable at 30°C
> (86°F) and 80% relative humidity with an air speed of only 1.6 m/s

The same authors conducted a similar study with personally controlled
floor fans. In this case, subjects were comfortable at a temperature of
30°C (86°F) and 60% relative humidity with an air speed of only 1 m/s.
However, the maximum air speed of the floor fans was not sufficient to
deliver thermal comfort at 30°C and 80% relative humidity, in which case
only 60% of subjects felt comfortable (comfort standards require at
least 80% of people to be comfortable in a given condition). The
researchers concluded that increasing the maximum air speed could
further improve the results.
\[[12](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/09/circulating-fans-air-conditioning.html#notes)\]

Both studies also found that none of the subjects complained about noise
or dry eyes as a consequence of the use of fans. Earlier experiments
with personally controlled fans showed that thermal comfort could be
maintained up to 31°C (88°F) and 50% relative humidity with an air speed
of 1.6 m/s, while studies in Thailand and Hong Kong have shown that
subjects were comfortable at temperatures well above 30°C (86°F) and a
relative humidity up to 85% with air speeds up to 3 m/s. It must be
noted, however, that these studies did not ask the subjects about
possible discomfort due to noise or dry eyes.
\[[12](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/09/circulating-fans-air-conditioning.html#notes)\]

Energy Savings of Circulating Fans

Circulating fans can save large amounts of energy, either by lowering
the energy use of air-conditioning, or by completely obviating the need
for it. International comfort standards dictate a very narrow comfort
zone for air-conditioned buildings in summer, which is between 23°C and
26°C (73-79°F).
\[[11](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/09/circulating-fans-air-conditioning.html#notes)\]
However, if air-conditioning is supplemented by the cooling effect of
circulating fans, a building's interior can be allowed to fluctuate
within an expanded temperature range while maintaining the occupants'
thermal comfort.



The 126 cm diameter [Aeratron E503](http://aeratron.org/e503/), one of
the ceiling fans tested, consumes only 4-8 watts for normal range of
use.

Warmer thermostat temperatures can bring about large energy savings. For
every rise in degree celsius above 25°C (77°F) in the thermostat setting
in summer, a cooling energy saving of between 9 and 12% can be achieved
(5% per degree F). Obviously, the energy consumption of fans should also
be taken into account. For ceiling fans running at high speeds, energy
use is approximately 2% of the air conditioning savings, leaving net
savings from between 7-10% for every degree celsius of thermostat rise.
Consequently, if fans allow a thermostat setpoint of, for example, 29°C
(84°F) instead of 24°C (75°F), the net savings amount to 35-50%.
\[[10](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/09/circulating-fans-air-conditioning.html#notes)\]

The new generation of fans with DC motors and magnetically levitated
bearings have remarkably low energy consumption. In the earlier
mentioned study, thermal comfort up to 30°C (86°F) could be provided by
fans using less than 10 watts, increasing energy savings up to 70%. Even
very low-wattage fans (3W) which produce an air speed of 1 m/s near each
occupant are capable of offsetting a 3°C (5.4°F) temperature rise,
saving around 30% of cooling energy. An additional benefit of the low
energy use of these fans is that they can be easily operated via battery
power during blackouts.
\[[12](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/09/circulating-fans-air-conditioning.html#notes)\]

> An additional benefit of the low energy use of these fans is that they
> can be easily operated via battery power during blackouts.

In more moderate climates, the use of circulating fans in combination
with natural ventilation or radiant cooling systems could easily allow
people to get rid of AC altogether. While natural ventilation can be
very effective in a well-designed building, obviating the need for fans
during most of the year, its effectiveness is dependent on outside wind
conditions. Fans can therefore act as a backup during windless days.
Furthermore, not all occupants might be close enough to a window to
enjoy the cooling effect of natural ventilation.

Fans also work well alongside slow acting radiant cooling systems,
because they can provide instant comfort in anticipation of the radiant
cooling coming on stream, shortening pre-cooling times.
\[[12](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/09/circulating-fans-air-conditioning.html#notes)\]
If circulating fans allowed people to ditch the AC entirely, cooling
energy savings could reach above 90%.
\[[10](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/09/circulating-fans-air-conditioning.html#notes)\]

The Limitations of Fans

The faster the air moves over the skin, the faster heat is lost from the
body. Unfortunately, there is a fundamental limit to the cooling effect
of circulating fans: they can only provide cooling at air temperatures
below the mean skin temperature, which is about 35°C (95°F). Fans cannot
cool people above that treshold, because moving air cannot reduce the
skin temperature below the ambient temperature – no matter how high the
air speed.

Despite this limitation, fans remain extremely useful at temperatures
above 35°C (95°F), because they can be used in conjunction with
air-conditioning. For instance, instead of cooling down a space to 24°C
(75°F), the aircon can cool it to 29°C (84°F), which is a comfortable
temperature if combined with fans. When used in tandem, the energy
savings during heat waves would be around 50% compared to using AC
alone.


fan for locally controlled airflow. Source: \[11\]

Another limit to air speed is the possible disturbance of loose papers,
which can become a problem in offices at fan speeds above 1 m/s. This
can be solved by paper weights, or by locating fans below the desks,
aimed at the midriff. Another solution would be the long-heralded
paperless office.
\[[10](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/09/circulating-fans-air-conditioning.html#notes)\]

Greater Comfort

The use of fans can increase thermal comfort in multiple ways. The main
difference between air conditioning and circulating fans is that AC
subjects all people in a space to the same thermal environment, while
fans allow the creation of personal microclimates. People react
differently to similar temperatures, and have different clothing and
activity levels. Therefore, it is very unusual for people to reach
unanimity on the AC thermostat settings. In offices, this problem is
often exacerbated by the tendency to overcool the building, forcing some
people to wear thick sweaters or even use electric heaters while outside
temperatures are well above 30°C (86°F).

> AC subjects all people in a space to the same thermal environment,
> while fans allow the creation of personal microclimates

Unlike air conditioning, fans can produce different thermal environments
in a single space. If people have personal fans at their desks, they
have control over their own thermal environment, greatly improving their
relative comfort. Studies also show that circulating fans can
significantly improve people's perceived air quality, possibly by
disrupting the body's naturally-occuring thermal plume through which
body odours and skin bioeffluents are carried to the breathing zone.
\[[12](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/09/circulating-fans-air-conditioning.html#notes)\]
Like AC, fans offer a solution in regions plagued by flying insects,
because these have trouble flying in the turbulent airflow of
circulating fans.
\[[10](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/09/circulating-fans-air-conditioning.html#notes)\]

Why are Fans Overlooked as a Cooling Option?

If fans are so effective and comfortable, why is their use not more
widespread? Because until very recently, international comfort standards
limited air movement indoors to a meagre 0.2 m/s in order to avoid
drafts.
\[[8](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/09/circulating-fans-air-conditioning.html#notes)\]
\[[14](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/09/circulating-fans-air-conditioning.html#notes)\]
Obviously, avoiding drafts is very useful during the heating season,
because in that case the powerful cooling effect of moving air is
counter-productive. The fact that air speed was limited to the same
level in summer, however, can only be explained by the fact that
American comfort standards are written by the national branch
organisation of the air cooling and heating industry (ASHRAE),
protecting and promoting its own products. (Comfort standards outside
the USA, such as ISO 7730 and EN 15251, are heavily influenced by
ASHRAE).
\[[11](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/09/circulating-fans-air-conditioning.html#notes)\]

Fortunately, these comfort standards have come increasingly under fire
in recent years, as more and more studies show that higher air speeds
can have a welcome cooling effect during the warm months. In 2010, the
thermal comfort standard “ASHRAE 55” was revised to permit higher indoor
air speeds: up to 0.8 m/s without local control of fan speed, and up to
1.2 m/s with local control of fan speed. Furthermore, at higher activity
levels these limits do not apply at all.



The 30cm diameter [Toshiba
Sient](http://www.toshiba.co.jp/living/fans/pickup/f-dln100_01.htm), one
of the tested floor fans. Power consumption is 2-8 watts for normal
range of use.

In ASHRAE 55-2013, which was presented less than a year ago, a further
step was taken by defining air speed not as a single-point maximum speed
but as the “average air speed”, being the average air speed at ankle,
midbody, and neck level. This allows the fan system to include higher
maximum local airspeeds in the occupied zone, since flows from fans are
rarely equally high at all three levels.
\[[12](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/09/circulating-fans-air-conditioning.html#notes)\]
\[[13](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/09/circulating-fans-air-conditioning.html#notes)\]
Although it will take some time before architects, engineers and
national building codes adopt the new guidelines, it looks likes the
circulating fan is back on track.

AC has Produced AC-Architecture

Meanwhile, however, a lot of damage has been done. While a renewed
interest in circulating fans could save large amounts of energy when
cooling buildings, there are limits to what can be achieved because the
widespread use of AC has had a profound influence on architecture.
Before the advent of air-conditioning, buildings in hot climates were
designed in such a way that they were comfortable during summer months
without the use of energy. They encouraged natural ventilation by, among
other things, large porches, high ceilings, roof vents, sash windows,
ventilation shafts, transoms over interior doors, and courtyards. Some
houses were even built on stilts to allow for more air circulation.
\[[1](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/09/circulating-fans-air-conditioning.html#notes)\]
\[[6](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/09/circulating-fans-air-conditioning.html#notes)\]
\[[9](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/09/circulating-fans-air-conditioning.html#notes)\]
\[[11](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/09/circulating-fans-air-conditioning.html#notes)\]

Traditional buildings in hot climates kept solar radiation out by using
heavy construction materials, big eaves, reflective tin roofs, and
growing shade trees around the house. Air conditioning did away with all
these building elements and stimulated the use of lighter and cheaper
building materials. Office blocks with H, T, and L-shaped footprints,
which facilitated cross-ventilation, were replaced by massive, square
blocks with very deep floor plans. Completely new building types
emerged, such as office towers with fully glazed facades or enclosed
shopping centres, which would be simply uninhabitable without
air-conditioning because of the greenhouse effect. While fans could
somewhat lower the energy use of air-conditioning in such buildings,
energy consumption would remain very high.
\[[1](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/09/circulating-fans-air-conditioning.html#notes)\]
\[[6](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/09/circulating-fans-air-conditioning.html#notes)\]
\[[9](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/09/circulating-fans-air-conditioning.html#notes)\]
\[[11](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/09/circulating-fans-air-conditioning.html#notes)\]

[Kris De Decker](http://www.krisdedecker.org) (edited by [Jenna
Collett](http://click.typepad.com/api/click?format=go&jsonp=vglnk_jsonp_14040698156716&key=7626aa89b5cdca8c8b5ad715622cd669&libId=d1fdef94-0fb9-4ef4-84a2-1dd653356ab1&loc=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.lowtechmagazine.com%2F2014%2F06%2Fthermal-efficiency-cooking-stoves.html&v=1&out=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.linkedin.com%2Fpub%2Fjenna-collett%2F1a%2F925%2Fb3&ref=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.lowtechmagazine.com%2F&title=LOW-TECH%20MAGAZINE%3A%20Well-Tended%20Fires%20Outperform%20Modern%20Cooking%20Stoves&txt=Jenna%20Collett))

[]{#notes}

Sources:

\[1\] “[Losing Our Cool: Uncomfortable Truths About Our Air-Conditioned
World (and Finding New Ways to Get Through the
Summer)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/1595587756/ref=as_li_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=1595587756&linkCode=as2&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkId=K65OFBC6WOQBGYDE)![](http://ir-na.amazon-adsystem.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=as2&o=1&a=1595587756){width="1"
height="1"}”, Stan Cox, 2010

\[2\] "[Home air conditioning in Europe – how much energy would we use
if we became more like American
households?](http://www.eceee.org/library/conference_proceedings/eceee_Summer_Studies/2005c/Panel_2/2246henderson/paper)"
(PDF), George Henderson, 2005

\[3\] "[While household air conditioners have become both more prevalent
and more efficient, new data highlight opportunities to lower energy
bills](http://www.eia.gov/pressroom/releases/press366.cfm)", US Energy
Information Administration, August 2011

\[4\] "[Peak Demand Impacts of Residential Air-Conditioning Conservation
Measures](http://uc-ciee.org/downloads/PeakPowerImpacts.Modera.PDF)",
Burke Treidler and Mark Modera, Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory, 1994

\[5\] "[The role of building technologies in reducing and controlling
peak electricity demand](http://enduse.lbl.gov/Info/LBNL-49947.pdf)"
(PDF), Jonathan Koomey and Richard E. Brown, LBNL, 2003

\[6\] “Growth in mobile air-conditioning: a socio-technical research
agenda”, Graham Parkhurst & Richard Parnaby, in "[Comfort in a Lower
Carbon Society (Building Research and
Information)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0415852862/ref=as_li_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0415852862&linkCode=as2&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkId=Q3QSWZ34LFPKXS2M)![](http://ir-na.amazon-adsystem.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=as2&o=1&a=0415852862){width="1"
height="1"}", Elizabeth Shove, 2008

\[7\] <http://www.allhandfans.com/>

\[8\] "[Human Thermal Environments: The Effects of Hot, Moderate, and
Cold Environments on Human Health, Comfort, and Performance, Third
Edition](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/146659599X/ref=as_li_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=146659599X&linkCode=as2&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkId=NMA5IA65R7XAKU3R)![](http://ir-na.amazon-adsystem.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=as2&o=1&a=146659599X){width="1"
height="1"}", Ken Parsons, 2014

\[9\] "[Thermally Active Surfaces in
Architecture](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/156898880X/ref=as_li_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=156898880X&linkCode=as2&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkId=DWK7GYHMQCETGXRV)![](http://ir-na.amazon-adsystem.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=as2&o=1&a=156898880X){width="1"
height="1"}", Kiel Moe, 2010

\[10\] "[Circulating fans for summer and winter comfort and indoor
energy efficiency](http://www.yourbuilding.org/library/1_tec25.pdf)"
(PDF), Richard Aynsley, 2007

\[11\] "[Adaptive Thermal Comfort: Principles and
Practice](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0415691591/ref=as_li_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0415691591&linkCode=as2&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkId=ALEQFIDNAT6TBHC5)![](http://ir-na.amazon-adsystem.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=as2&o=1&a=0415691591){width="1"
height="1"}", Fergus Nicol, Michael Humphreys & Susan Roaf, 2012

\[12\] "[Air movement as an energy efficient means toward occupant
comfort](http://escholarship.org/uc/item/2d656203)", Edward Arens, Hui
Zhang, Wilmer Pasut, Yongchao Zhai, Tyler Hoyt, Li Huang, November 2013.
Prepared for State of California Air Resources Board, Research Division.

\[13\] "[ASHRAE Publishes 2013 Version of Thermal Comfort
Standard](https://www.ashrae.org/news/2013/ashrae-publishes-2013-version-of-thermal-comfort-standard)",
December 2013

\[14\] "[Moving Air for
Comfort](http://www.taylor-engineering.com/downloads/articles/ASHRAE%20Journal%20-%20Moving%20Air%20for%20Comfort.pdf)"
(PDF), Edward Arens et al, ASHRAE Journal, May 2009

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------



Insulation: First the Body, then the Home

Modern thermal underclothing offers the possibility to turn the
thermostat much lower without sacrificing comfort or sex appeal. The
potential energy savings are huge; the costs are almost nil.

Read more: [Insulation: First the body, then the
home]({filename}/posts/body-insulation-thermal-underwear.md).

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
