Title: If We Insulate Our Houses, Why Not Our Cooking Pots?
Date: 2014-07-01 13:11
Author: Kris De Decker
Category: Low-tech Solutions
Tags: efficient cooking, fireless cooker, sustainable cooking
Slug: cooking-pot-insulation-key-to-sustainable-cooking
Status: published



While modern cooking stoves are convenient, when it comes to energy use
they leave a lot to be desired. As we [have seen in the previous
article]({filename}/posts/thermal-efficiency-cooking-stoves.md),
the thermal efficiency of an electric hob does not exceed that of a
conventional open fire. In both cases almost 90% of the primary energy
is lost during the cooking process.

Cooking food could be achieved in a far more energy efficient way,
especially if the cooking pot itself is insulated. This is the principle
behind the fireless cooker, a well-insulated box that keeps food
simmering with only the heat of the cooking pot itself. A fireless
cooker doubles the efficiency of any type of cooking device because it
shortens the time on the fire and limits heat transfer losses.

In the early twentieth century, fireless cookers were common additions
to western kitchens, similar to the refrigerator or cooking stove. Some
models even integrated fireless cookers with gas or electric hobs. These
functioned by lowering an insulated hood over the cooking pot once the
heat had been switched off.

Image: a fireless/gas cookstove from the 1920s.




In the previous article, we found that [cooking food is an incredibly
inefficient
process]({filename}/posts/thermal-efficiency-cooking-stoves.md).
The thermal efficiency varies from 13% for electric hobs to 23% for gas
hobs, and from 5 to 25% for open fires and crude biomass stoves. Cooking
stoves also produce considerable levels of indoor air pollution --
especially in developing countries but also in the modern kitchens of
wealthy households. These results show that in both developed and
developing nations, energy efficiency and pollution levels in the
cooking process can stand to be improved.

The proposed strategies to tackle these issues differ for poor and rich
countries. In poorer countries, most efforts concentrate on improving
energy efficiency and lowering the indoor pollution caused by biomass
stoves. Rocket stoves, for example, can achieve thermal efficiencies of
45% or more, with only about half of the emissions. However, any type of
improved biomass stove still requires wood for fuel, and continues to
produce air pollution.

In the western world, the proposed solution is a more widespread use of
the best available technology, such as electric induction stoves.
However, these devices obtain a thermal efficiency of only 15%, which
means that 85% of the energy generated for cooking is wasted. In
summary, the present-day approach to improving the sustainability of
cooking stoves is not very ambitious.

Why is cooking so inefficient?
------------------------------

To further improve upon the efficiency of cooking, we have to take a
closer look at where the greatest energy losses are incurred. For
electric hobs and microwaves, the most significant waste of energy can
be attributed to power conversion losses. Converting fossil fuels or
biomass into electricity produces an energy efficiency level of 20-45%
depending on the power plant, which explains why electric stoves are
among the least efficient cooking devices.



Gas stoves have the largest heat transfer losses of all modern cooking
stoves. Picture: [Ashley Bischoff @
Flickr](https://www.flickr.com/photos/handcoding/2306148621/sizes/l/in/photolist-9fwxsE-ceme3-6fsdHT-baqyQD-4vMBD8-7qKtbt-7wgwmh-5mxmYh-7t5MRY-32Zkcr-334VPJ-32ZneV-6WNUnd-4otRwY-9YKx7X-eNvbyf-5K212X-6oy431-3i4xq-5dhzoB-6aXzBk-bcpTDp-3LarEn-5Ru5J2-3i4xp-4sXcWB-4tNCfP-7teghU-8XjEGz-4KFDC7-4nXEtC-CgUdE-4hWhcF-4jFwAw-7estzW-49Ti1-9n5zm5-5vGLzJ-5LULtt-6v5ReY-67t5UC-5FrWB8-5vCsSD-6psLwc-a2JTdv-SBfWT-8shCrM-52ndMn-4RfqYF-7jkgdz/).

The second most significant energy loss for electric stoves, and the
most important one for all other cooking stoves, occurs during the
transferral of heat from the cooking hob to the food in the cooking
vessel. Not all heat produced by the fire reaches the cooking pot, and
heat is lost through the walls and lid of the pot, as well as through
escaping steam.

> The cooking process is similar to heating an uninsulated building with
> all the doors and windows open

In order to bring water to a boil and to keep a dish simmering, the
cooking stove has to continuously compensate for these heat transfer
losses. This is similar to heating an uninsulated building with all the
doors and windows open. Even the most performable stoves now available
-- rocket stoves and wood gas stoves&mdash;only achieve a maximal thermal
efficiency of 40-50%.

Obviously, we could do better. With regards to potential improvements in
cooking sustainability, four technologies deserve further attention: pot
skirts, fireless cookers, pressure cookers, and solar cookers. While
each of these is a solution in themselves, they are especially
advantageous when used together.

Pot Skirts
----------

A simple way to start improving cooking efficiency is by using a pot
skirt. This device increases heat transfer efficiency between cooking
stove and cooking pot. They work with all but the electric stove. A pot
skirt is a vertical sleeve, usually of metal, that forces the hot gases
from the fire to flow closely around the sides of the pot. Skirts can be
insulated on the outside, which brings the additional benefit of
decreasing heat losses from the sides of the pot.



A pot skirt. Picture:
[Ecozoomstove](http://ecozoomstove.com/blogs/ecozoom/13498333-maximum-rocket-stove-efficiency-use-a-pot-skirt).

A pot skirt also reduces the effects of fire assymetry, which can be a
problem for both outdoor and indoor cooking. Experiments in rooms with
virtually no crossflow of air can show highly assymetric flame patterns,
which decrease heat transfer efficiency. [Tests on three types of
stoves](http://www.vrac.iastate.edu/ethos/files/ethos2010/Saturday/Stoves,%20Electricity,%20and%20Heat%20Transfer/Skirts%20Paper_Andreatta.pdf)
-- an open fire, a biomass rocket stove and a gas rocket stove&mdash;showed
that pot skirts can improve heat transfer efficiency by about 10-20% for
a rocket stove, and by about 30% for an open fire. Since heat transfer
losses are the main inefficiency for these types of cooking stoves, this
is not a bad start.

Pressure Cookers
----------------

The rather well-known pressure cooker takes a different approach. A
pressure cooker is a sealed vessel which reaches higher water
temperatures because of added steam pressure, making it more energy
efficient and able to cook food faster. It is either operated
electrically (as a standalone device or on an electric stove), or used
in combination with a gas, biomass, coal or solar stove. The pressure
cooker lowers both power conversion losses (because of shorter cooking
times) and heat transfer losses (because it completely eliminates heat
loss through evaporation).



A pressure cooker. Picture: Wikipedia Commons.

Scientific studies on the energy efficiency of a pressure cooker could
not be found. Manufacturers usually advertise energy and time savings of
up to 70% when compared to cooking in a normal pot. If we assume these
figures to be correct averages (which is probably overly optimistic),
then the thermal efficiencies of cooking stoves start to look more
promising.

If a pressure cooker is used on an electric stove, the cooking process
would reach a thermal efficiency of 22%, which brings it on par with a
well-tended three-stone fire. The combination of a gas stove with a
pressure cooker would achieve a thermal efficiency of 39%, while the
combination of a well-tended three-stone fire with a pressure cooker
would obtain 40% thermal efficiency. The best result is achieved via the
combination of pressure cooker and rocket stove, which is 62% effective.
\[1\]

Fireless Cookers
----------------

While we can see marked improvements with the pressure cooker, these
vessels still lose heat through the walls and lid, and these losses are
considerable. There are also heat transfer losses between the stove and
the pot if the device is placed on a hob. However, if we bring food to a
boil and then quickly put the pot in a well-insulated box, the heat
transfer energy losses can be minimized to such an extent that the
cooking process continues, without any further energy input.


cooker in a basket. Picture: [Solar Cookers
International](http://solarcooking.wikia.com/wiki/Heat-retention_cooking).

This is the principle of the "fireless cooker" or "heat retention
cooker", which is best described as the passive house concept applied to
cooking. A passive house is a well-insulated building that requires
little energy for space heating of cooling.

> The fireless cooker is the passive house concept applied to cooking

The fireless cooker is the key to efficient cooking in poor and rich
countries alike. It almost completely eliminates heat transfer loss and
reduces cooking time on the fire or hob substantially, thus addressing
the two largest energy losses in the cooking process. Fireless cookers
can lower energy use by more than 80%, but the precise savings potential
depends on many factors. Such factors include the insulation material,
the design of the fireless cooker, the required cooking time of the
dish, the food itself, and the swiftness with which the cooking pot is
moved from the stove to the fireless cooker.



A classical fireless cooker. Picture: [Natuurlijk
Bewaren](http://www.natuurlijkbewaren.nl/website/).

The Partnership for Clean Indoor Air (PCIA) has measured the energy
savings of fireless cookers. In their [test of 18 types of solid fuel
cooking
stoves]({filename}/posts/thermal-efficiency-cooking-stoves.md),
the energy savings of the fireless cooker amount to an average fuel
reduction of 50%, which is the number we will use in this article.

If we combine an electric stove with a fireless cooker, we can double
its thermal efficiency. Combined they reach 26%, which is still not very
impressive, but at least achieves a higher energy efficiency than a gas
stove alone. A gas stove used in conjunction with a fireless cooker
obtains 46% thermal efficiency, while a well-tended fire with a fireless
cooker attains 50%. A combination of a rocket stove with a fireless
cooker is more than 80% efficient. \[1\]



These numbers could be further improved if we combine the fireless
cooker with the pressure cooker. If we use a pressure cooker to bring
food to a boil and then put the pressure cooker into a fireless cooker,
we can cook at 40%-90% efficiency, depending on the cooking stove used.
This compares to a maximum of 23% for our western cooking stoves, and
40%&mdash;or at most 50%&mdash;for improved biomass stoves.

In its simplest form, the fireless cooker is a wooden, metal or plastic
container filled with straw, old clothes, styrofoam, paper or any other
insulation material. It can even be a cooking pot wrapped into a
sleeping bag. Usually 5 to 10 cm of insulation is applied on all sides,
the upper layer often in the form of an easy-to-handle, scaled-down
mattress or pillow. A more cost-effective technique to lower energy use
is hardly imaginable.

Fireless Cookers in History
---------------------------

In some parts of the world, the concept of the fireless cooker has been
known about for centuries. During the middle ages, [Europeans
used](http://www.peoplescollectionwales.co.uk/items/7915) "hayboxes" and
holes in the ground filled with straw. American Indians took a slightly
different approach to limiting heat transfer losses by enclosing the
heat source (fire-heated stones or clay balls) within the cookware. Some
American Indian groups used "[cooking
baskets](http://www.brighthubeducation.com/social-studies-help/96105-traditional-native-american-cooking/)"
for this purpose; tightly woven [watertight
baskets](http://books.google.es/books?id=OsJZahLLUxoC&printsec=frontcover&hl=nl&source=gbs_ge_summary_r&cad=0#v=onepage&q&f=false),
which could be coated with clay for insulation. Others stone-boiled
soups and stews in a hole that they dug in the ground, lined with animal
hide.

The fireless cooker became popular in the western world in the years
between the 1890s and the 1930s. A Norwegian "self-cooking apparatus"
received an award at the 1867 World Exhibition in Paris. It was a simple
yet elegant container with four layers of felt for insulation.


fireless cooker with associated cooking pots. Image: Wikipedia Commons.

> During the first decades of the twentieth century, the fireless cooker
> became a permanent fixture of many American and European households

Initially, the heat retention cooker was mainly used to make food more
portable for use by people on the move such as fishermen, hunters and
soldiers. Amsterdam trams (streetcars) had them onboard for the driver.
However, during the first decades of the twentieth century, the fireless
cooker also became a permanent fixture of many American and European
households, an appliance often found next to the cooking stove.

The best models were made entirely out of metal lined with mineral wool
insulation, and kept the cooking pot and insulating material separated
for easy cleaning and durable construction. These devices were also used
for cooling.


above: A fireless cooker integrated into a gas hob.



Image above: A Chambers Fireless Cooking Gas Range from the 1910s. The
insulated hoods were lowered over the burners.

Another innovation from the early twentieth century was the [fireless
cooking gas
range;](http://www.vintagechambers.com/indexe042.html?module=pagemaster&PAGE_user_op=view_page&PAGE_id=2&MMN_position=8:8)
a combination of gas stove, gas oven and fireless cooker. The device
obviated the need to move cooking utensils from the hob to the fireless
cooker by making use of insulated hoods&mdash;"thermodomes"&mdash;that could
be lowered over the burners. The food was brought to a boil, the gas was
shut off, and then the pot would be covered up by the thermodome. The
inverted receptacle was raised and lowered with the assistance of a
counterbalance.



Interestingly, the hood was partially lowered while the gas was burning.
The interior thus became hot from the heat which would otherwise escape,
ensuring that plenty of retained heat would be available for cooking
after the gas was turned off. Later versions worked completely
automatically, shutting off the gas and lowering the hood at a preset
time.

Another attempt to merge fireless cookers with cookstoves was the [deep
well
cooker](http://www.automaticwasher.org/cgi-bin/TD/TD-VIEWTHREAD.cgi?51147_3)
(also known as the "thrift cooker"). Old ranges, both gas and electric,
sometimes had one of their burners sunk into a hole in the cooktop. This
"well" had heavily insulated sides and enclosed a specifically designed
pot with an insulated lid and no handles on the sides.



A deep well cooker from the 1950s.
[Source](http://www.automaticwasher.org/cgi-bin/TD/TD-VIEWTHREAD.cgi?51147_3).

With some models, the burners could double as a surface unit. Although
they were not really fireless cookers&mdash;the pot was on a low fire --
deep well cookers reduced heat transfer losses considerably.

Improved Fireless Cookers
-------------------------

The use of heat retention cookers declined in the 1930s, and then
resurfaced during World War Two and the oil crises of the 1970s. Today
the fireless cooker is mainly promoted for use in developing countries.
NGO's that have introduced the technology are&mdash;among others --
[Practical Action](http://practicalaction.org/fireless-cooker-1), [HELPS
International](http://helpsintl.org/) and [Solar Cookers
International](http://solarcooking.wikia.com/wiki/Heat-retention_cooking).
The designs made for developing countries differ, from the insulated
baskets of Solar Cookers International to the styrofoam insulated
[Wonderbag](http://nb-wonderbag.com/Pages/Default) or
[ONIL](http://pciaonline.org/files/RHC%20Guide%20English.pdf).

Although heat retention cookers can be made cheaply with natural and
locally available resources, they could just as well be mass-produced
using more sophisticated materials. While it makes the devices less
sustainable in production, plastic has made fireless cookers more
practical, and superior insulation materials have improved their
performance.

> The thermal cooker is a compact, high-tech version of a fireless
> cooker

An important innovation in the western market is the so-called thermal
cooker which appeared in the 1990s. The device is based on vacuum
technology: the principle behind the thermos flask. The thermal cooker
is comprised of a removable cooking pot, with handle and lid, that fits
inside a vacuum flask which has a diameter ranging from 20 to 50 cm. The
cooking pot is heated on the cooking stove (regardless of type) and then
moved to and sealed in the flask. Find an exampe
[here](http://www.zojirushi.com/products/snxae).



A thermal cooker. The high-tech version of the fireless cooker. The
cooking pot (left) is put on the fire and transferred to the vacuum
flask (right) once to food has been brought to a boil. Picture: [Thermal
Cookware](https://www.thermalcookware.com/main.php?mod=Shop&file=Cats)

In a thermos flask or thermal vacuum cooker the space between the dual
walls of a cylinder is completely evacuated. With virtually no molecules
of gas available, heat transfer by conduction and convection are almost
eliminated and therefore thermal conductivities are extremely low.
Insulation thickness is about one-seventh of that of rockwool and
one-third that of petrochemical insulation foams for similar thermal
resistance.

The result is a much more compact fireless cooker, which could easily
become part of any western kitchen as a standard, built-in device next
to the cookstove. Smaller thermal cookers could be used to make hot food
portable. Vacuum insulation is also available in the form of [insulation
panels](http://www.porextherm.com/en/products/vacupor.html), which you
could use to build a compact yet superinsulated fireless cooker
yourself. (But although home production is possible, one would have to
adapt to available sizes&mdash;it's not possible to cut the panels as this
would destroy the vacuum).

All too often, fireless cookers are pictured as an emergency device
aimed at campers, refugees or survivalists. However, a relatively simple
device that can double the efficiency of whatever cooking technology you
have at your diposal deserves more credence than that. The fireless
cooker should be a commonplace item in every kitchen. Aside from its
energy saving potential, its use in the western world would also
encourage its acceptance in the developing world.

Time Saving
-----------

In the beginning of the twentieth century, time savings were the main
sales argument for fireless cookers. This seems odd, because the average
cooking time doubles compared to the traditional cooking process.
Fireless cookers do afford the cook more time, however, by reducing the
amount he or she spends in front of the stove or fire.



Early twentieth century advertisement for fireless cooking.

Once the cooking pot has been transferred to the fireless cooker, it
requires no further attention and the cook is free to do something else,
even if it's outside the house. It's impossible for the food to boil
over, and there is no fire hazard to keep an eye on. Furthermore, a dish
can stay hot for up to 6 hours or more, so the timing of the cooking
process becomes more flexible.

A fireless cooker also increases the capacity of a cooking stove,
whether it runs on electricity, gas, coal, wood or solar energy. You can
put a new dish on the fire while the other one is simmering in the
fireless cooker. With every fireless cooker you add, the capacity of the
cooking stove increases further.

Solar Cookers + Fireless Cookers
--------------------------------

This feature is especially interesting in combination with a solar
cooker. A fireless cooker increases the capacity of a solar cooker, but
it also allows you to cook if there is not much sun available. When a
fireless cooker is used to complete the cooking process, a solar cooker
requires as little as half an hour of sunshine to cook dinner.

Fireless cookers essentially act as batteries, storing energy in hot
food. They greatly increase the usefulness of solar cookers, making them
appropriate even on cloudy days and in countries where there is less
sunshine. Furthermore, the combination of solar cooker and fireless
cooker allows you to prepare a meal that can be served hours after
sunset.



A low-tech solar box cooker. Image: Wikipedia Commons.

When viewed alongside all other cooking appliances, the solar cooker is
the ultimately sustainable stove. It requires zero fuel and produces
zero air pollution. Even if gas or solid fuel stoves could reach a
thermal efficiency of 100%, they would still require resources like wood
or coal, and they would continue to produce air pollution. The solar
cooker is the only cooking device that doesn't face these issues.

> The fireless cooker greatly increases the usefulness of a solar cooker

There exist [many designs for solar
cookers](http://solarcooking.wikia.com/wiki/Category:Solar_cooker_plans).
The simplest type is the solar box cooker, which is not much more than
an insulated box with a glass plate on top. The glass allows solar
radiation to enter, heating up the interior, while the insulated walls
decrease heat loss. There is not much difference between a solar box
cooker and a fireless cooker, and both appliances could be merged into
one design. Solar box cookers can also work under cloudy conditions
because they are able to exploit diffuse radiation.

Parabolic solar cookers incorporate a more complex design, and use
curved mirrors to focus solar radiation on a focal point. They work
faster, produce higher temperatures, and have the ability to fry, roast
and barbeque food. They are, however, more challenging to build, they
require frequent orientation to the sun, they can be dangerous, and they
only work in clear weather conditions. Panel cookers&mdash;such as the
[CooKit](http://solarcooking.wikia.com/wiki/CooKit)&mdash;incorporate
elements of both box and parabolic cookers.



A parabolic solar cooker. Picture: [Solar Cookers
International](http://solarcooking.wikia.com/wiki/Heat-retention_cooking).

The solar cooker is not the only way to take advantage of solar energy
for cooking. Electric cookstoves or microwaves run by electricity from
PV solar panels can also be considered solar powered cookstoves.
However, converting solar energy into electricity to convert it to heat
in order to boil water is needlessly complex, energy inefficient, and
very expensive compared to taking advantage of solar heat in a direct
way by using a solar cooker.

Indoor Solar Cooking
--------------------

Like improved biomass stoves and fireless cookers, solar cookers are
mainly promoted in developing countries as an alternative to the use of
open fires. The technology is distributed by some 500 organisations,
companies, and individuals, united in the [Solar Cookers World
Network](http://solarcooking.wikia.com/wiki/Solar_Cookers_International_Network).
The promotion of panel and box cookers is mostly aimed at households and
refugees, while the more sophisticated parabolic cookers are generally
reserved for large-scale cooking in institutions.

The promotion of solar cookers in developing countries has produced
improved technology that can be useful all over the world. For example,
it is now possible to cook indoors using solar energy. This can happen
in two ways: either by focusing a parabolic cooker through a wall
aperture and then reflecting the sunlight onto a cooking pot, or by
using concentrated sunlight to generate steam which is then transported
through pipes to a nearby indoor kitchen.



Indoor solar cooking. Image: [Solare
Brücke](http://www.solare-bruecke.org/index.php?lang=en).

Both approaches were demonstrated in the Scheffler Community Kitchens in
India. These cooking installations are applied on a very large scale,
for example at the Shirdi Temple where a solar cooked lunch is served to
[over 50,000 people per
day](http://www.renewindians.com/2012/07/indian-temples-set-high-standards-in.html).
However, using solar energy indoors can also happen on a much smaller
scale, as is demonstrated by the system pictured above.

> Solar cookers used in developing countries are usually not the most
> efficient devices. Improving them with more sophisticated materials
> greatly increases their usability

Although a remarkable and highly sustainable piece of equipment, most
solar cookers used in developing countries are not the most efficient.
As Appropedia [notes](http://www.appropedia.org/Solar_cooking), solar
cookers are "solar concentrators where precision and efficiency have
been sacrificed for ease of construction and use of readily available
materials".

The performance of these cookers could be enhanced if we built them in a
more sophisticated way. For example, low-E window glass makes a solar
box cooker much more efficient, as most heat that escapes from the box
is through the glass. Solar Cookers International
[notes](http://solarcooking.wikia.com/wiki/Where_is_solar_cooking_possible%3F)
that the ongoing development of more efficient models continues to push
the practicality of solar cookers into higher latitudes.

Making Cooking Sustainable: "Integrated Cooking"
------------------------------------------------

Combining cooking stoves with solar cookers, fireless cookers, and
pressure cookers turns an inefficient process into a year-round
sustainable system that dramatically cuts greenhouse gas emissions, fuel
use, and air pollution. This holds true for poor and rich countries
alike, regardless of which type of cooking stove is used.

Increasingly, NGO's are betting on a combination of solar cookers,
fireless cookers and improved biomass stoves, an approach that is known
as "integrated cooking". \[2\] In "integrated cooking", solar cookers
are used whenever possible, while the improved biomass stove offers a
solution when solar energy is not available. The fireless cooker is used
in combination with both, increasing the capacity of the cooking system
and maximizing energy efficiency. For an example, [see this
video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I1U2ILREJqk).

A similar system in the western world could even utilise electric or gas
stoves instead of improved biomass stoves. Because the use of fireless
cookers, pressure cookers and solar cookers shortens the use of electric
or gas stoves considerably, their low efficiency becomes less of a
concern. If the energy use of gas and electric stoves is substantially
reduced, it also becomes more realistic to supply this smaller amount of
energy by renewable sources, such as wind power.


cooking: combining solar cookers, fireless cookers and improved biomass
stoves.

> Increasingly, NGO's are betting on a combination of solar cookers,
> fireless cookers and improved biomass stoves

Solar cookers and fireless cookers are good examples of the kind of
technology that we aim for here at Low-tech Magazine. They can be cheap
and easy to make, they are truly sustainable, and yet they are superior
to any cooking technology available in pre-industrial times. The
[extensive use of water
power]({filename}/posts/boat-mills-bridge-mills-and-hanging-mills.md)
and [wind power in
history]({filename}/posts/history-of-industrial-windmills.md)
seems to suggest that solar cooking goes back many centuries, but that
is not the case. The first experimental solar box cookers only appeared
in the 18th century, and parabolic cookers only showed up in the late
19th century.

Solar cookers and fireless cookers might have a very low-tech image, but
they integrate well with high-tech materials. Before the Industrial
Revolution, we had no tin or aluminium foil, no vacuum technology, no
plastic containers, and no thermally insulated glass. Cooking with
fireless cookers, pressure cookers and solar cookers is not a return to
the now impractical or defunct gadgets of the past. Rather, it is an
innovative approach that optimizes existing knowledge and technology
with the aim of radical energy efficiency.

Kris De Decker (edited by [Jenna
Collett](http://click.typepad.com/api/click?format=go&jsonp=vglnk_jsonp_14040698156716&key=7626aa89b5cdca8c8b5ad715622cd669&libId=d1fdef94-0fb9-4ef4-84a2-1dd653356ab1&loc=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.lowtechmagazine.com%2F2014%2F06%2Fthermal-efficiency-cooking-stoves.html&v=1&out=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.linkedin.com%2Fpub%2Fjenna-collett%2F1a%2F925%2Fb3&ref=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.lowtechmagazine.com%2F&title=LOW-TECH%20MAGAZINE%3A%20Well-Tended%20Fires%20Outperform%20Modern%20Cooking%20Stoves&txt=Jenna%20Collett))

Thanks to all readers who have urged me to write about fireless cookers.

Related Articles:

-   [Well-Tended Fires Outperform Modern Cooking
    Stoves]({filename}/posts/thermal-efficiency-cooking-stoves.md)
-   [The Bright Future of Solar Thermal
    Factories]({filename}/posts/solar-powered-factories.md)
-   [Medieval Smokestacks: Fossil Fuels in Pre-Industrial
    Times]({filename}/posts/peat-and-coal-fossil-fuels-in-pre-industrial-times.md)
-   [Wood Gas Vehicles: Firewood in the Fuel
    Tank]({filename}/posts/wood-gas-cars.md)
-   [Reinventing the
    Greenhouse]({filename}/posts/reinventing-the-greenhouse.md)
-   [Fruit Walls: Urban Farming in the
    1600s]({filename}/posts/fruit-walls-urban-farming.md)
-   [Back to Basics: Direct
    Hydropower]({filename}/posts/direct-hydropower.md)
-   [Power from the Tap: Water
    Motors]({filename}/posts/power-from-the-tap-water-motors.md)

Notes:

\[1\] This is a rough calculation as I have assumed that the cooking
time is equally divided between the cooking stove and fireless cooker,
and that the energy use of a cookstove is the same whether it brings
water to a boil or merely simmers it. This leads to either an
overestimation or an underestimation of the combined thermal efficiency,
depending on the technology used. For example, a rocket stove is
especially efficient at high power output and much less so while
simmering water, so that the combined efficiency of rocket stove and
fireless cooker is higher than mentioned.

\[2\] See for instance "[Solar Cooker Project: Best Practices
Manual](http://www.jewishworldwatch.org/downloads/scp_best_practices.pdf)"
(Jewish World Watch) and "[General Kitchen Management
Practices](https://energypedia.info/wiki/General_Kitchen_Management_Practices)"
(Energypedia).
