Title: Back to Basics: Direct Hydropower
Date: 2013-08-11 02:24
Author: Kris De Decker
Category: Low-tech Solutions
Tags: direct hydropower, hydropower, micro hydro, pelton turbine, pelton wheel, small hydro, water power
Slug: direct-hydropower
Summary: The hydro power installations in use today are less energy efficient than those of earlier centuries.
Status: published

![image](/images/direct-hydropower-1.png)
Picture: Direct Hydro Power Coffee Depulper. Picture: [Brian W.
Raichle](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0973082612000634)

All hydropower plants today produce electricity. Transforming energy to
electricity seems to be the only way to harness water power, but it is
not. For almost two thousand years, water wheels powered machines
directly via mechanical transmission.

Some small direct hydro powered systems in South America present a
strong case for combining the use of modern materials with old fashioned
methods of water power mechanization.

The higher efficiency of this approach means that less water is needed
to produce a given amount of energy. This lowers the cost of hydropower
and enables power to be produced by the use of very small streams.

> The hydro power installations in use today are actually less efficient than those of earlier centuries

Throughout the course of history, the efficiency of water powered prime
movers has steadily increased. Wooden water wheels, which appeared more
than 2,000 years ago, converted a relatively small amount of water
energy into mechanical power: The efficiency was 5 to 15% for an
horizontal water wheel, 20 to 30% for a vertical undershot water wheel,
and 50 to 60% for a vertical overshot water wheel. [^1]

Iron water wheels, which appeared in the late 18th century, had improved
the efficiency rating of the vertical overshot wheel to 65 to 85%. [^1]
Water turbines, which were developed in the 19th century, and which are
the water-powered prime movers that we still use today, generally
convert over 85% of the kinetic energy inherent to the water source into
mechanical power at the shaft of the turbine. [^2] 

Water turbines are ten to twenty times more compact than water wheels for the same power
output, an advantage that led to much cheaper and much more powerful
prime movers. Turbines are more widely applicable than water wheels,
because water wheels could not make efficient use of any head of water
(the vertical distance travelled by the water) much greater than their
own diameter. [^1]

## Why Modern Hydro Power is Less Efficient

In spite of these significant improvements, hydropower installations
today are actually *less* efficient than those from earlier centuries.
The culprit is electricity. Not long after the introduction of the water
turbine, another change occured. Instead of using water-powered prime
movers to run machinery *directly* (as had been the case for centuries),
water turbines were (and still are) used to generate electricity. This
modern approach has introduced an energy deficit that has nullified any
progress behind hydropower design efficiency.

![image](/images/hydro-powered-coffee-depulper-1.jpg)
Direct Hydro Power Coffee Depulper. Picture: [Brian W.
Raichle](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0973082612000634)

In a modern hydropower installation, a water turbine converts the energy
in the moving water into rotational energy at its shaft, which is then
converted into electrical energy by the generator that is coupled to the
turbine. Next, the electrical energy is converted back into rotational
energy by the electric motor of the machine that is being powered. Every
energy conversion introduces energy loss. 

This loss of energy occurs due
to friction, which is observable as heat, vibration and noise. Friction
occurs at all levels of electrical transmission: In the turbine, the
generator, and the motor. Additional components such as batteries, drive
systems and inverters can further increase efficiency losses.

It is possible to calculate the efficiency rating for each modern
hydropower unit by measuring the difference between turbine input and
electric generator output. A home-sized hydropower plant generating AC
electric power has a "water-to-wire" energy transfer of at best 60 to 70
percent. Smaller DC electric systems, which require inverters and generally have
battery banks, have lower efficiencies of 40 to 60 percent. [^3]

Energy loss in the electric motors of the devices being powered is not
included but should also be considered ("water-to-motor" efficiency).
The efficacy of an electric motor can vary wildly - from less than 60%
for small motors to more than 95% for large motors. On average, a
hydro-electric power installation only converts about half of the energy
available in water into useful work.

> A direct hydropowered coffee depulper in Nicaragua has been performing flawlessly through five harvests

This means that a small, modern hydropower plant has a similar
efficiency rating to a centuries old configuration using a wooden
vertical overshot water wheel (50-60%), and that this modern counterpart
is considerably *less* efficient than the iron water wheels of the 18th
century (65-85%). 

In an old fashioned hydropower installation, there was
only one conversion of energy; A water wheel converted the energy
inherent to the water source into rotational energy at its shaft. The
same shaft also moved the machinery, so that the only source of
significant energy loss occured in the water wheel itself. [^4]

![image](/images/direct-hydro-coffee-depulper-3.jpg)
Direct Hydro Power Coffee Depulper. Picture: [Brian W.
Raichle](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0973082612000634)

Note that this is not the total efficiency of the hydropower
installation: friction also occurs in the pipeline that feeds the water
to the turbine. Most small hydropower systems don't use dams. Instead,
they divert a fraction of the water of a stream downhill through a pipe.
The energy losses in the pipeline are the same for hydroelectric and
direct hydropower installations. Therefore, for the purposes of our
comparison, these power losses can be overlooked.

## Why Direct Hydropower Makes Sense

There is one possible hydropower configuration in particular that
deserves considerable attention: a water turbine directly powering
machinery, without the intermediate step of generating electricity.
Depending on the type of turbine used in such a system, the value that
corresponds to the "water-to-motor" efficiency is roughly 80 to 95%. The
implementation of this form of direct hydropower doubles the
effectiveness of a small scale electric hydropower installation. [^4]

The higher efficiency of direct hydropower brings important advantages.
If the intermediate step of generating electricity is bypassed,
considerably more power can be gathered and utilized from a given head
(the vertical distance travelled by the water) and water flow rate (the
amount of water that runs down a stream). This advantage can be used to
increase the energy production of an existing water power site. It also
means that more potential water power sites become available, and that
relatively small streams and rivers can be shared by several hydropower
units.

Because of its higher efficiency a direct hydropower system is also
cheaper than a hydroelectric power system. Less water is needed to
produce a given amount of power, which means that all components of the
installation are reduced in size, cost, and other resources. For
instance, less civil engineering is required. Water can be carried to
the turbine by low cost, low pressure, easily transportable, flexible,
plastic tubes that are small in diameter as opposed to the rigid, large
diameter penstocks common to electric hydropower plants. The flexible
connections between the pressure pipe and turbine also simplify
installation.

![image](/images/hydro-powered-coffee-depulper-4.jpg)
Picture: Direct Hydro Power Coffee Depulper. Source: [Brian W.
Raichle](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0973082612000634)

Last but not least, the higher efficiency of direct hydropower limits
the ecological impact of a water power site. Maintaining enough water in
the power source for aquatic life to thrive is a cornerstone of
environmentally sound microhydropower production. This type of
ecological sustainability is easier to achieve with direct hydropower
because less water is required.

## Old-School Approach, Modern Materials

Many NGO's are [introducing small hydropower systems in the developing
world](http://www.ashden.org/micro-hydro). Almost all of them are aimed
at the production of electricity. However, there are a few exceptions to
this standard practice. In 2007, a team from the Appalachian University
in the US designed, built and installed a direct hydropowered coffee
depulper in Nicaragua. According to [a recent
study](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0973082612000634)
in *Energy for sustainable development*, it has "performed flawlessly
through five harvests". [^5]

> Because less water is needed to produce a given amount of power, all components of the system are reduced in size and cost

Much of the necessary energy for coffee harvesting and processing is
provided by manual labour. One of the most tedious, labour intensive
steps of coffee bean processing is depulping. In the past, the depulping
process was restricted to a hand cranked machine, and would take all
night to complete. Now, with the help of direct hydropower technologies,
the depulping can be completed in two or three hours.

![image](/images/direct-hydro-turbine.jpg)
The bronze runner of the Watermotor model 150. Picture: [Campo
Nuevo](https://www.facebook.com/media/set/?set=a.294347793935906.63549.294293947274624&type=3).

The installation can deliver a maximum of 800 watt mechanical power with
a head of 35 m and a water flow of 300 liters per minute. The material
costs amounted to just \$1900. For comparison, *Practical Action* states
that, when using appropriate technologies, a small scale hydroelectric
installation [costs \$1,800 to \$6,000 per installed
kilowatt](http://practicalaction.org/micro-hydro-power). It takes about
two kilowatts of mechanical power to produce one kilowatt of electric
power, so that direct hydropower is at least twice as economically
viable as a hydroelectric operation with the same rate of energy
production.

## Precise Control

The turbine used by the direct hydropowered coffee depulper is a
commercially available *Water Motor model 90* from [*Campo
Nuevo*](http://www.watermotor.net) in Bolivia. According to the
manufacturer, the compact machine (16 x 16 x 32 cm) is "the only modern
turbine designed to drive common machines directly with water power".
The turbine uses a 9 cm diameter Turgo type runner, which converts water
power into mechanical power at 80 to 85% efficiency. It is suited for
moderate to high head systems. The larger model 150 has a 15 cm diameter
runner and produces about three times as much power.

![image](/image/water-motor.jpg)
The Campo Nuevo Watermotor model 150. Picture: [Campo
Nuevo](https://www.facebook.com/media/set/?set=a.294347793935906.63549.294293947274624&type=3).

The water motor is as easy to control and adjust as an electric motor.
It has a power switch that allows instant on/off control, which makes it
practical to directly power machines which must be turned on and off
many times during use. The mechanism works by deflection of the water
from the runner, so that the force of the flow does not increase the
pressure in the penstock.

The power output of the turbine can be precisely adjusted. Like any
other turbine of the impulse type, a Turgo runner is driven by high
velocity jets of water. A manifold separates the water flow into four
smaller tubes, with each stream leading to one of the four jets driving
the turbine wheel.

![image](/images/water-motor-in-casing.jpg)
The Campo Nuevo Watermotor in its casing. Picture: [Campo
Nuevo](https://www.facebook.com/media/set/?set=a.294347793935906.63549.294293947274624&type=3).

Each of the four nozzles has an individual valve to provide for a range
of flows, so that the motor can be run on one to four jets at a time.
Furthermore, the jets can be adjusted to various sizes. This mechanism
makes it possible to precisely measure and adjust the power output of
the motor and cater to seasonal variations in water flow.

## Direct Hydropowered Woodworking Unit

At the *Campo Nuevo* demonstration site in the Andes, the water motor
runs a large variety of machines, including a [small woodworking
unit](http://www.watermotor.net/motor.html) (table saw, grinder, joiner,
drill, abrasive disk), a cement mixer, and a grain mill. When mechanical
power is not being used by any of these machines (for instance at
night), the motor runs a generator which stores electric energy in
batteries for lighting and other purposes. The water motor can also
operate an air compressor to run air-powered tools. (In principle, it
could also run [a compressor from a
refrigerator](http://www.flickr.com/photos/13080477@N08/1498486336/sizes/l/in/set-72157603355180063/)).
[^6]

> A small storage tank makes it possible to run even more powerful machines

The water motor on the demonstration site delivers power similar to a
0.75 horse power (560 watt) electric motor at 1,450 rpm using a stream
with a vertical fall of 18 m and an average water flow of 310 liters per
minute. These conditions are less than ideal for a hydroelectric power
site, but for direct hydropower the situation is perfect.

A small storage tank attached to the direct hydropower unit even makes
it possible to temporarily run more powerful machines. Since the
operation of the table saw requires 500 liters of water per minute
(which is often not available), the 6,000 liter storage tank was
installed, measuring 2 x 2 x 1.5 m. It allows the table saw to run for
15 minutes continuously. This additional power output adds up over two
hours of operating time over the course of a ten hour workday.

![image](/images/water-motor-running-table-saw.jpg)
A set-up of a water motor running a table saw and generator. Picture:
[Campo
Nuevo](https://www.facebook.com/media/set/?set=a.294347793935906.63549.294293947274624&type=3).

All machines (including the generator and air compressor) are placed
directly on or beside the turbine housing. These tools are attachable to
(and driven by) the same belt. The water motor can only operate one
machine at a time, since there is no distribution of energy. This works
well in a workshop, because many tools and machines are used
intermittently.

The same configuration is used for the direct hydropowered coffee
depulper in Nicaragua, which was described above. Coffee beans are
harvested from December through February, and they must be depulped
within 24 hours of picking. This processing constraint means that the
depulper is only used at night for a small fraction of the year.

Therefore, the direct hydropower installation is often available for
other applications (such as running a saw, a drill, an air compressor,
or an electric generator). Although the turbine that powers the coffee
depulper can provide up to 800 watts of mechanical power, the coffee
depulper itself uses only one fourth of that waterpower and one jet to
deliver 200 watts for its operation.

## Upgrading Medieval Water Mills

Will we see a rebirth of direct hydro power? Maybe, but the fact remains
that this form of energy production has never disappeared. In some
mountainous regions, there are still water wheels in operation that
share similar design with the water mills so extensively used in
medieval Europe. The rotating shaft directly drives machinery, most
commonly found today as grain mills for flour production.

In remote villages in Nepal, many farmers use all wooden traditional
water mills to grind grain. About 25,000 to 30,000 of these are still in
operation today. In Nepal, the goal is not to reintroduce direct
hydropower, but to make sure that it *stays*. That is why the national
NGO [Central for Rural Technology
Nepal](http://www.crtnepal.org/)(CRT/N) runs a program to upgrade these
mills. The improved water wheels can grind grain more efficiently and
have longer lifespans, which allows them to compete better with diesel
powered mills.

![image](/images/improved-water-mill.jpg)
CRT/N have increased the efficiency of water mills in Nepal by replacing
wooden runners with precision-made metal ones. Picture:
[CRT/N](http://www.crtnepal.org/).

Basically, CRT/N [upgrades medieval style water wheels to
nineteenth-century style water
wheels](http://www.ashden.org/winners/crt), by replacing key wooden
parts such as the shaft and the runner with locally produced precision
metal parts. The wooden penstock that delivers water to the mills is
replaced by a high density polyethylene pipe which reduces leakage and
other avoidable problems.

> In Nepal, an NGO has upgraded more than 5,000 still operating all wooden water mills to nineteenth-century standards, doubling their efficiency and allowing them to compete with diesel power

CRT/N calls its technology the [Improved Water
Mill](http://www.crtnepal.org/?option=technology&tid=3232313031) (IWM).
Estimates suggest that grinding capacity of the upgraded mills has
doubled, which corresponds neatly with the efficiency figures we
introduced at the beginning of this article. The higher efficiency makes
that less water is needed and that the mills can operate for longer
periods of the year.

## Replacing Diesel Engines

The NGO has upgraded 5,700 water mills from 1990 to 2009. Some of these
upgrades (237 to be precise) also involved adapting water mills so that
they can run other machines as well, such as oil presses, rice
de-huskers, sawing machines, or an electric generator. To achieve this
variability, a longer shaft is installed which disconnects the runner
from the millstones. Instead of connecting to the millstones, the
grinding shaft operates from the long shaft using a belt drive, allowing
other machines to be operated by direct hydropower.

![image](/images/improved-water-mill-4.jpg)
With a long-shaft attachment, several machines such as a rice-huller can
be run from a mill. Picture: [CRT/N](http://www.crtnepal.org/).

While these upgraded water wheels do not achieve the high efficiency of
direct hydropower installations using turbines, they are less expensive.
Basic upgrades of a water mill cost \$350, whilst the option of running
multiple machines brings the total cost at \$900 to \$1,200. Thus,
upgrading a traditional water mill is at least two times cheaper than
installing a complete new, turbine driven direct hydropower system. In
Nepal, improved water mills have even replaced some diesel powered grain
mills, because they are less expensive to run and produce better quality
flour.

The water mill upgrade project is still
[ongoing](http://www.crtnepal.org/?option=projects&pjid=3330313139).
Similar but much smaller projects have been implemented by [IT Power
India](http://www.ashden.org/winners/itpi), also in the Himalayas (70
upgraded mills at a cost of \$200 each), and by
[SITMo](http://www.ashden.org/winners/sitmo) in the Philippines (as part
of a mostly electric hydro scheme).

## The best of both worlds

This plea for direct hydro does not imply that we should stop using
electricity. Some things cannot be powered by mechanical energy, most
importantly lighting and electronic equipment. Furthermore, many people
in the developing world do not have access to electricity at all,
forcing them to use unhealthy kerosene lamps instead.

Rather, the examples described above show that it might be interesting
to combine both methods. The best results would be obtained by a
hydropower installation that produces mechanical power for operating
machines, and stores electric power in batteries for lighting and other
purposes when mechanical power is not required (for instance at night).
Compared to a strictly mechanical system, it would offer important extra
benefits. Compared to a merely electric system, it would deliver more
power and be much more efficient.

Water motors can also be used if you don't have a mountain stream
running next to your house, farm or factory. That's the topic of the
next post: [Power from the tap: water
motors]({filename}/posts/power-from-the-tap-water-motors.md).

Kris De Decker (edited by Caylen Cole-Hazel)

[^1]: *[Stronger than a Hundred Men: A History of the Vertical Water
Wheel (Johns Hopkins Studies in the History of
Technology)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0801872480/ref=as_li_qf_sp_asin_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0801872480&linkCode=as2&tag=lowtemagaz-20)![](http://ir-na.amazon-adsystem.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=as2&o=1&a=0801872480){width="1"
height="1"}*, Terry S. Reynolds, 1983. See pages 106, 306-307, and
342-349.

[^2]: The efficiency of a water turbine depends on the type of turbine
used. There are many types of turbines available, and each one is aimed
at specific combinations of head and water flow. For small-scale hydro
applications, a minimum efficiency of 80-85% can be achieved in any
situation. Pelton turbines are up to 90% efficient and large turbines
can be over 95% efficient.

[^3]: [*Intro to
Hydropower*](http://www.homepower.com/articles/intro-hydropower-part-3),
Home Power Magazine, 2012. Another source is the [*Fact Sheet
MicroHydro*](http://appropriatetec.appstate.edu/sites/appropriatetec.appstate.edu/files/microhydro_factsheet6.pdf)
of Appalachian State University, which gives an average system
efficiency of 53% (including energy loss in the pipeline). And a [recent
study](http://ijecs.in/ijecsissue/wp-content/uploads/2013/03/416-432ijecs.pdf)
states: "It is common to assume an overall system efficiency of 50–60%.
However, in practice actual power output may be as low as 30% of gross
input power for very small installations and as high as 70% for larger
schemes."

[^4]: To this should be added the energy loss in the drive train, which
is needed to match the rotational speed of the prime mover with that of
the machine being powered. This loss has been included in the efficiency
results of modern hydro power installations, where a drive system is
used to match the rotative speeds of turbine and generator, but not in
the results for the old-fashioned installations. The energy loss in the
drive train can be quite large, for instance when you would use a
slow-turning water wheel to operate an electric generator or a circular
sawing machine, which require high rotational speeds and thus elaborate
gearing to step up the speed. On the other hand, the energy loss in the
drive train can be negligible when a water turbine is used to directly
power fast-rotating machinery, because water turbines have much higher
rotational velocity than water wheels. This also holds true for water
wheels operating machines which do not require high rotational speeds.
Turbines operating slow-rotating machines will need gearing to step down
the speed. If the connection is made by a single gear, chain or belt,
the drive train can be up to 99% efficient.

[^5]: [*Design and Construction of a Direct Hydro Powered Coffee
Depulper*](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0973082612000634),
Energy for Sustainable Development 16 (2012) 401-405. Brian W. Raichle,
Raymond S. Sinclair, Jeremy C. Ferrell.

[^6]: [*Water Power in the Andes. Yesterday's Solution for Today's
Needs*](http://ps-survival.com/PS/Hydro-Power/Water_Motor_In_Bolivia_Runs_Table_Saw_Home_Power_Magazine_2004.pdf),
Ron Davis, 1999

## Related Articles

The use of direct mechanical energy can also be useful for pedal power
and wind power. The use of direct thermal energy can be useful for solar
power:

-   [The bright future of solar thermal powered
    factories]({filename}/posts/solar-powered-factories.md)
-   [Pedal powered farms and
    factories]({filename}/posts/pedal-powered-farms-and-factories.md):
    the forgotten future of the stationary bicycle
-   [Bike powered electricity generators are not
    sustainable]({filename}/posts/bike-powered-electricity-generators.md)
-   [Wind powered
    factories]({filename}/posts/history-of-industrial-windmills.md):
    history (and future) of industrial windmills

In some cases, the transmision of power could also be done more
efficiently without electricity:

-   [The mechanical transmission of power (1):
    Stangenkunst]({filename}/posts/mechanical-transmission-of-power-stangenkunst.md)
-   [The mechanical transmission of power (2): Jerker line
    systems]({filename}/posts/the-mechanical-transmission-of-power-jerker-line-systems.md)
-   [The mechanical transmission of power (3): Endless rope
    drives]({filename}/posts/the-mechanical-transmission-of-power-3-wire-ropes.md)

