Title: Electric Velomobiles: as Fast and Comfortable as Automobiles, but 80 times more Efficient
Date: 2012-10-24 01:23
Author: Kris De Decker
Category: Low-tech Solutions
Tags: electric velomobiles, velomobile, velomobiles
Slug: electric-velomobiles
Status: published



Both the velomobile and the electric bicycle increase the limited range
of the cyclist&mdash;the former optimises aerodynamics and ergonomics,
while the latter assists muscle power with an electric motor fuelled by
a battery.

The electric velomobile combines both approaches, and so maximises the
range of the cyclist&mdash;so much so that it is able to replace most, if
not all, automobile trips.

While electric velomobiles have a speed and range that is comparable to
that of electric cars, they are up to 80 times more efficient. About a
quarter of the existent wind turbines would suffice to power as many
electric velomobiles as there are people.

All pictures:
[Fietser.be](https://sites.google.com/site/mobilitylabbe/Home)


This article is also available in
[French](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/les-v%C3%A9lomobiles-electriques-aussi-rapides-et-confortables-que-les-automobiles-mais-80-fois-plus-efficaces.html)
and
[Spanish](http://www.es.lowtechmagazine.com/2013/11/el-velomovil-electrico-rapido-y-comodo-como-un-automovil-80-veces-mas-eficiente.html).

Few people find the bicycle useful for distances longer than 5 km (3
miles). In the USA, for instance, 85 % of bicycle trips involve a trip
of less than 5 km. Even in the Netherlands, the most bicycle-friendly
country in the western world, 77 % of bike trips are less than 5 km.
Only 1 % of Dutch bicycle trips are more than 15 km (9 miles). In
contrast, the average car trip amounts to 15.5 km in the USA and 16.5 km
in the Netherlands, with the average trip to work being 19.5 km in the
USA and 22 km in the Netherlands. (Sources:
[1](http://blog.bikeleague.org/blog/2010/01/national-household-travel-survey-short-trips-analysis/),
[2](http://www.cbs.nl/nl-NL/menu/themas/verkeer-vervoer/publicaties/artikelen/archief/2008/2008-2539-wm.htm),
[3](http://nhts.ornl.gov/2009/pub/stt.pdf),
[4](http://nhts.ornl.gov/2009/pub/stt.pdf),
[5](http://www.cvs-congres.nl/cvspdfdocs/cvs10_027.pdf).)

It’s clear that the bicycle is not a viable alternative to the car.
Depending on his or her fitness, a cyclist reaches cruising speeds of 10
to 25 km/h, which means that the average trip to work would take at
least two to four hours, there and back. A strong headwind would make it
even longer, and when the cyclist is in a hurry or has to climb hills,
he or she would arrive all sweaty. When it rains, the cyclist arrives
soaking wet, and when it’s cold hands and feet would freeze. Longer
trips on a bicycle also affect the body: wrists, back, shoulders and
crotch all suffer, especially when you choose a faster bike.

An electrically-assisted bicycle solves some of these problems, but not
all. The electric motor can be used to reach a destination faster, or
with less effort, but the cyclist remains unprotected from the weather.
Longer trips would still cause discomfort. Moreover, the range of most
electric bicycles (about 25 km or 15.5 miles) is just large enough for
the average one-way trip to work, which means that it will not suffice
for all commutes.

The Advantages of an Electric assist Velomobile
-----------------------------------------------

The velomobile&mdash;a [recumbent tricycle with aerodynamic
bodywork]({filename}/posts/the-velomobile-high-tech-bike-or-low-tech-car.md)
-- offers a more interesting alternative to the bicycle for longer
trips. The bodywork protects the driver (and luggage) from the weather,
while the comfortable recumbent seat eases the strain on the body,
making it possible to take longer trips without discomfort. Furthermore,
a velomobile (even without electric assistance) is much faster than an
electric bicycle.



At speeds below 10 km/h (6 mph), rolling resistance is the biggest
challenge for a cyclist. Air resistance becomes increasingly influential
at higher speeds, and becomes the dominant force at speeds above 25 km/h
(15.5 mph). This is because rolling resistance increases in proportion
to speed, while air drag increases with the *square* of speed. Because a
velomobilist has much better aerodynamics than a bicyclist&mdash;the drag
coefficient of a velomobilist is up to 30 times lower&mdash;he or she can
attain higher speeds with the same effort.

> If rigged with an electric auxiliary motor, the weak points of the
> velomobile&mdash;its slower acceleration and climbing speed&mdash;are
> eliminated

On the downside, a velomobile is heavier than a bicycle, which means
that it takes more effort to accelerate and to climb hills. Acceleration
is inversely proportional to the mass of a vehicle, so a velomobile uses
roughly twice as much energy during acceleration than a bicycle,
depending on the weight of the driver and vehicle.

If rigged with an electric auxiliary motor, the weak points of the
velomobile&mdash;its slower acceleration and climbing speed&mdash;are
eliminated. At the same time, a motor accentuates its advantages by
further improving on the range of a cyclist. Last but not least, a
battery will give a much better range in the velomobile, due to its
better aerodynamics.

Test Driving a Ferrari
----------------------

In August, I test drove an electrical velomobile&mdash;the
[eWAW](https://sites.google.com/site/mobilitylabbe/blog/e-wawabio-electrichybrid),
a vehicle that is sold by
[Fietser.be](https://sites.google.com/site/mobilitylabbe/Home)&mdash;in and
around Ghent, Belgium. Brecht Vandeputte, the driving force behind the
Belgian manufacturer, accompanied me in an unassisted WAW during a one
and a half hour trip through the city and along the tow path of the
river Schelde.

The [WAW
velomobile](https://sites.google.com/site/mobilitylabbe/Home/waw/what-is-the-WAW/berichtzondertitel-1)
(without electrical assistance) was originally developed for winning
human-powered vehicle races. It was adapted for daily use with the
addition of, among other things, a leakproof rear tyre, open wheel
arches (which make the vehicle more agile), an adjustable seat, and a
more durable body&mdash;which consists of a carbon roll bar and safety cage
surrounded by aramid crumple zones. The WAW is known worldwide, at least
among velomobilists, as one of the fastest velomobiles available on the
market&mdash;some call it the *Ferrari* of the velomobiles.



The WAW stands out because of its weight (it is 28 kg, as opposed to 34
kg, the weight of the most popular velomobiles, the Dutch
[Quest](http://en.velomobiel.nl/quest/) and
[Alleweder](http://alleweder.jp-web.de/index.php?page=introduction&lang=en))
and its low centre of gravity (it has a ground clearance of only 9 cm
and a height of just 90 cm). Along with a wide wheelbase, a hard
suspension, and precise steering (it uses two gear sticks instead of
one), this results in high speeds and excellent handling, even on sharp
corners. Of course, the WAW also has the drawbacks you can expect from a
real sports car, like the very basic interior finish and the fact that
the vehicle rattles like a box of rocks when you ride it over a
cobblestone road. If road conditions are bad, other velomobiles with
more comfortable suspension will be a better choice.

> With 250 watts of power, the electric motor of the eWAW gives a person
> with an average fitness level the power output of an athlete

The eWAW that I drove has everything that the WAW has, plus an electric
motor of 250 watts and a surprisingly small battery of 288 Wh, which
takes you 60 to 130 km further (37 to 81 miles). The battery and the
motor add only 5 kg, bringing the total weight of the vehicle to 33 kg.
This is comparable to the weight of other velomobiles without electric
assistance. Hence, this pedal powered Ferrari is more than 10 kg lighter
than other velomobiles, with a 250 watt electric assistance, such as the
hybrid Alleweder and the e-Sunrider, which weigh 45 kg.

Cycling at 50 km/h
------------------

So how fast is the WAW, and how much faster is the eWAW? First of all,
the eWAW is a hybrid vehicle, but the biomass powered motor, also known
as the driver, is not included in the package. Because the driver always
provides the main part of the total power output, the speed of the
vehicle will depend on the power that he or she can deliver. There is no
better illustration of this than my test drive. Over a period of about
an hour and a half, Brecht and I managed to reach an average speed of 40
km/h (25 mph)&mdash;I was in the eWAW and had the regular assistance of the
electric motor, Brecht was in a WAW *without* pedal assistance.



Cycling literature makes a distinction between three types of cyclists:
people with an average fitness level, people with a good fitness level,
and top athletes. Riders with an average fitness can maintain a power
output of 100 to 150 watts over a period of one hour. Riding a WAW, this
translates to speeds of 35 to 40 km/h in ideal conditions&mdash;an
unobstructed racetrack, and a completely closed vehicle. Drivers with a
good fitness level can deliver 200 watts of power over a period of one
hour, which translates to speeds of 45 to 50 km/h under the same
circumstances.

With 250 watts of power, the electric motor of the eWAW gives a person
with an average fitness level (like me) the power output of an athlete
(100 + 250 watts = 350 watts).

Maximizing Range and Efficiency
-------------------------------

I am a speed freak, so when I found myself on a nice, open stretch of
road, the first thing I did was start the motor at full throttle and
pedal like a madman at the same time. If I could have more than 350
watts at my disposal, I calculated, I must be able to reach speeds of at
least 70 or 80 km/h (40 to 50 mph). However, my attempt to go any faster
than 50 km/h (30 mph) left me frustrated&mdash;the vehicle lacks the high
gears needed for those speeds.

Why? Because the eWAW is designed for maximum efficiency. The electric
motor is intended to be used for acceleration only (and for climbing
hills). Once the velomobilist reaches a cruising speed of about 40 to 50
km/h, he or she switches to pedalling alone.

> The engineer’s choice to assist the driver only during acceleration is
> smart; it increases the range of both the cyclist and the battery
> spectacularly

The eWAW does not increase the cruising speed or top speed of the
unassisted WAW, although it does increase the average speed because it
speeds acceleration. This is a different approach from the electric
bicycle, where pedal assistance is continuous at normal cruising speeds.
With regards to efficiency, the concept behind the eWAW makes much
sense.

A bicyclist needs less energy to accelerate than a velomobilist does
(because of the bike’s lighter weight) but more energy to keep up speed
(because of its weak aerodynamics). In contrast, a velomobilist needs
more energy to accelerate than a bicyclist does (because of the
vehicle’s heavier weight) but less energy to keep up speed (because of
its excellent aerodynamics).



Because it takes more energy to accelerate in an eWAW than to drive it
at a constant speed, the engineer’s choice to assist the driver only
during acceleration is smart; it increases the range of both the cyclist
and the battery. The electric motor supports the driver during peak
efforts, so that his or her endurance will increase spectacularly. (Peak
efforts have a detrimental effect on endurance, while pedalling at a
steady pace can be done for hours.) Meanwhile, the driver offers the
same service to the battery. Because the electric motor is shut off at
cruising speed, the battery range increases considerably.

This said, the driver of the eWAW can choose to use the motor at
cruising speed, because it can be operated at his or her will by means
of a throttle. This is how I drove the vehicle. As a consequence, the
battery lasted ’only’ 60 km (37 miles), but at least I could keep up
with Brecht.

80 times More Efficient than Electric Cars
------------------------------------------

Mounting an electric engine in a velomobile is controversial among
velomobilists, just as an electric bicycle is skewed by many biking
aficionados. However, when we compare the eWAW with the electric car,
still viewed by many as the future of sustainable transportation, it’s a
clear winner. In fact, the electric velomobile is everything [what the
electric car wants to be, but
isn’t](http://www.notechmagazine.com/2012/10/life-cycle-analysis-of-electric-cars.html):
a sustainable alternative to the automobile with combustion engine. It
is nearly impossible to design a personal, motorised and practical
vehicle that is more efficient than the eWAW.

> If all 300 million Americans replace their car with an electric
> velomobile, they need only 25 % of the electricity produced by
> existing American wind turbines

A simple calculation can illustrate this claim. Imagine that all 300
million Americans replace their car with an electric velomobile and all
drive to work on the same day. To charge the 288 Wh battery of each of
these 300 million eWAW’s, we need 86,4 GWh of electricity. This is only
25 % of the electricity produced by existing American wind turbines (on
average per day during the period July 2011 to June 2012,
[source](http://www.eia.gov/electricity/monthly/pdf/epm.pdf)). In other
words, we could make a switch to private vehicles operating on 100 %
renewable energy, using existent energy plants.


credit: [Bill Bates](http://www.flickr.com/wmbates/sets)

Now imagine that all 300 million Americans replaced their cars with an
electric version like the Nissan Leaf, and all drive to work on the same
day. To charge the 24 kW battery of each of those 300 million vehicles,
we need 7,200 Gwh of electricity. This is *20 times more than what
American wind turbines produce today*, and 80 times more than what
electric velomobiles need. In short: scenario one is realistic, scenario
two is not.

Even if we all started carpooling, and every electric automobile could
carry five people, there remains a large gap in efficiency. Charging 60
million electric cars would still require 16.6 times more electricity
than charging 300 million eWAW’s. The electric velomobile also makes it
fairly easy for a driver to charge his or her own vehicle. A solar panel
of about 60 watts (with a surface area of less than one square metre)
produces enough energy to charge the battery, even on a dark winter day.

In Europe, it would take an even smaller share of the existent wind
turbines to charge every European’s eWAW. For the sake of thoroughness,
it should be mentioned that the bio-motor also requires energy: the
driver needs to eat, and this food needs to be produced. But since
western people eat too much, and then drive their cars to the gym in
order to lose excess fat, this factor can be safely ignored.

Range Anxiety
-------------

The large difference in energy efficiency between electric velomobiles
and electric cars is remarkable, because both have a similar range. As
mentioned, the eWAW takes you a distance of 60 to 130 km, depending on
how intensively you use the motor. The Nissan Leaf takes you [at best
160
km]({filename}/posts/the-status-quo-of-electric-cars-better-batteries-same-range.md),
when you drive slowly and steadily, and when you don’t make use of the
air-conditioning, heating or electronic gadgets on board.

> Adding only 6 kg of batteries increases the range of the electric
> velomobile to 450 km

A heating system is not required in a velomobile, not even in winter,
because hands and feet are protected from the wind by the bodywork, and
because the driver is active (body activity is the [most important
factor in maintaining thermal
comfort]({filename}/posts/body-insulation-thermal-underwear.md)).
The need for cooling in summer, on the other hand, will decrease the
range&mdash;the driver will rely more on the electric motor in order to
cool down.



Interestingly, it is easier to increase the range of the electric
velomobile than of the electric car, if necessary. The eWAW can be
equipped with one or two extra batteries, which increases the range up
to 180 km (112 miles, with continuous assistance of the motor) or 450 km
(280 miles, when the motor is only used to assist acceleration). Adding
two batteries to the eWAW increases the weight of the vehicle by only 6
kg, and still leaves ample space for luggage. If we suppose that the
rider weighs 70 kg, then adding two batteries increases the total weight
of the eWAW from 103 to 109 kg&mdash;a weight gain of 6 %. If we apply the
same trick to the Nissan Leaf (where three times as many batteries take
the place of the rear seat and the trunk), total weight increases from
1,582 kg (the driver of 70 kg included) to 2,022 kg&mdash;a weight gain of
30 %.

Another way to increase the range of an electric vehicle is swapping
batteries or fast-charging them. These options are available for both
electric cars and velomobiles, but developing a charging infrastructure
for electric cars is a daunting task, while doing so for electric
velomobiles is easy. The battery of the eWAW not only needs 80 times
less energy than the battery of a Nissan Leaf (which makes
[fast-charging]({filename}/posts/fast-charging-electric-cars-off-peak-grid.md)
a real option), it also weighs 73 times less (which makes swapping
batteries a very low-tech operation). While we do have faster vehicles
for long distances that are equally sustainable (like
[trains]({filename}/posts/train-travel.md) and
[trolleybusses]({filename}/posts/trolleytrucks-trolleybuses-cargotrams.md)),
the velomobile offers an alternative for those who prefer a personal
means of transportation, or for those who prefer an active lifestyle.

> The capacity of our roads would at least quadruple if we switched from
> cars to velomobiles

When the battery of an electric velomobile drains, the velomobilist can
still pedal home&mdash;at speeds above those of a bicycle. The driver of
the electric car can’t do that, because his contraption is too heavy.
One Nissan Leaf weighs as much as 46 eWAW’s. Most of the energy used by
an electric car (and by a car with combustion engine), is used to move
the vehicle itself, not the driver&mdash;the Nissan Leaf is 21 times
heavier than its driver. In the case of the eWAW, this relation is
reversed: the driver weighs two to three times more than the vehicle.

Fast and Smooth Traffic
-----------------------

The eWAW makes cycling a fast and comfortable option for longer
distances. At a cruising speed of 50 km/h (31 mph), the average commute
in the USA (19.5 km or 12 miles) would take 23.4 minutes. This compares
very favourably with the car, for which the average commute time is 22.8
minutes ([source](http://nhts.ornl.gov/2009/pub/stt.pdf)). In the
Netherlands, where road traffic is heavy, the electric velomobile is
potentially faster than a car. The velomobile could cover the average
commute of 22 km (13.7 miles) in 26.4 minutes, while it takes 28 minutes
by car ([source](http://www.cvs-congres.nl/cvspdfdocs/cvs10_027.pdf)).



Of course, a cruising speed of 50 km/h does not mean that a velomobilist
can reach an average speed of 50 km/h during the whole trip. If cars
could maintain their maximum cruising speed during the commute, they
would be much faster than velomobiles. In reality, however, they can’t
do that because of speed limits, traffic lights and traffic jams.

Velomobiles could suffer similar delays, but there is an important
difference: because a velomobile occupies much less space than a car
(one car needs as much space as four velomobiles), free-flowing traffic
is a much more realistic option for velomobiles. The capacity of our
roads would at least quadruple if we switched from cars to velomobiles.
Furthermore, the cruising speed of a velomobile does not exceed most
speed limits.

Pimp up your Velomobile
-----------------------

Over and above this, it is easy to equip a velomobile with a more
powerful motor and higher gears, allowing for much higher cruising
speeds. It would lose efficiency and range, but, since an eWAW is 80
times more efficient than an electric car, there is quite a bit of room
for pimping up a velomobile. 

You would think that a vehicle that is 80 times more efficient than an
electric car, and offers a similar speed and range, would be encouraged
by governments worldwide. However, the opposite is true.

The biggest obstacle for manufacturers and drivers of electric
velomobiles is legislation. Many countries have effectively outlawed
electric velomobiles by limiting the speed, power output and use of the
electric motor.

Picture: the
[Windexplorer](http://www.wind-explorer.com/index.php/start_en), a fully
electric vehicle based on the
[DuoQuest](http://www.velomobiel.nl/duoquest/) velomobile.


The main problem is that the motor can assist the driver only up to a
certain speed: 25 km/h (15.5 mph) in most European countries, and 32
km/h (20 mph) in most American and Canadian states. With regards to the
electric bicycle, limiting the electric assistance to 25 or 32 km/h
presents no difficulties, because few bicyclists reach higher cruising
speeds. Therefore, the electric motor can continuously assist the
cyclist, increasing speed or reducing effort. However, velomobilists
with an average or good fitness reach cruising speeds of 35 to 50 km/h.
This means that, at worst, the electric motor can only assist the driver
until it reaches to half the cruising speed.

Above that speed, the electric motor and battery become a disadvantage
rather than a help, because the driver has to provide more power during
acceleration in order to propel the additional weight to cruising speed.
Once at cruising speed, the motor is of no use either. Only during
climbing, when the velomobile will have difficulty reaching speeds above
25 km/h, is the electric assistance advantageous within the limits of
the law.

##Illegal Vehicle

Apart from speed limitation, legislation introduces two additional
barriers for electrically-assisted cycles (a legal category that
includes velomobiles). Firstly, motor output is limited, to 250 watts in
most European countries, to 500 watts in most Canadian states, and to
750 watts in most American states. Secondly, the motor is required to
stop working whenever the velomobilist stops pedalling. Completely
electric driving is not allowed, even if it is alternated with
pedalling.

In some countries and US states, electric velomobiles can be registered
as a moped or motorcycle, which makes it possible to drive them legally.
However, this introduces different obstacles. The driver needs to be of
a minimum age and attain a license, while the vehicle requires insurance
and a tag or license plate. It would also be subjected to an annual
inspection. Most importantly, electric velomobiles registered as mopeds
or motorcycles are regulated as motor vehicles, rather than as consumer
products, which introduces additional safety requirements and rigorous
testing before they are allowed on the market. Meeting these criteria is
a costly affair for the producers of velomobiles, which are often very
small companies.

> Within the limits of the law, the electric motor and battery are a
> disadvantage rather than a help

In Belgium, as in most European countries, electric velomobiles cannot
be homologated as a moped or motorcycle. Consequently, the eWAW that I
tested was not a legal vehicle. It violated two of three regulations: it
had the sensor that shuts off the motor at speeds above 25 km/h removed,
and it had a motor that can be operated according to the will of the
rider, which allows for driving without pedalling.

##Legal Limbo

Laws dealing with electrically-assisted cycles can vary extremely,
depending on the country, state, province or even municipality. In
Germany, cycles with an electric assistance of up to 250 watts and 25
km/h are considered bicycles, while cycles with an electric assistance
of up to 500 watts and 45 km/h can be registered as mopeds. In
Switzerland, cycles with an electric assistance of up to 250 watts and
25 km/h are considered mopeds, while cycles with an electric assistance
of up to 1,000 watts can be registered as a *motorcycle*, in which case. In Austria, cycles can have an
electric assistance of up to 600 watts and 45 km/h while still being
considered as a bicycle.



[Windexplorer](http://www.wind-explorer.com/index.php/start_en).

In the USA, limits for maximum motor power vary from 750 to 5,000 watt,
depending on the state. In some states, cycles with an electric
assistance of up to speeds of 30, 40 or even 60 mph (48, 64 and 94 km/h)
are considered bicycles. In other states, all cycles with electric
assistance are regulated as mopeds, regardless of motor power and speed.
Some states have no laws and others outlaw electric cycles altogether.
To make things more complicated, several countries and states also
regulate things like seat height, braking distance, type of
transmission, the weight of the vehicle, the diameter of the wheels or
the number of wheels (some allow two and three wheels but not four
wheels, others allow two or four wheels but not three wheels).

> A car with a top speed of 270 km/h can be driven anywhere on Earth,
> while an electric velomobile with an electric assistance of up to 50
> km/h is illegal is most countries

Road regulations are even more confusing, because they are often
complicated by provincial and municipal restrictions. Generally, if
electric velomobiles are registered as a bicycle, they should use bike
lanes and bike paths whenever possible, while velomobiles registered as
mopeds or motorcycles are obliged to share the road with cars. However,
there are many exceptions, effectively creating a legal limbo.

This is in stark contrast with the laws regulating engine power and
speed for cars, which are the same *all over the world*. In particular,
both engine output and maximum speed are *left completely free*. This
leads to the very strange fact that a car, for instance a Porsche
Cayenne Turbo S with a weight of 2,355 kg, an engine of 382,000 watts
and a top speed of 270 km/h can be driven anywhere on Earth, while an
electric velomobile with a weight of 35 kg, a motor of 250 watts and an
electric assistance of up to 50 km/h is illegal in most countries. A
consequent legislation would either limit the motor output and speed of
both cars and velomobiles, or leave motor output and vehicle speed
unregulated in both cases, combined with maximum road speeds and speed
checks.

##Towards a New Class of Vehicles?

The complex legal situation in which the velomobile finds itself, is
telling. The velomobile, and especially the velomobile with electric
assistance, calls into question the validity of the existing vehicle
categories. The velomobile can be described as an extremely fast and
comfortable cycle, as well as a particularly efficient automobile. It is
difficult to categorize, and this makes the technology so interesting.
The mobility debate is characterised by an ideological divide between
motorised and non-motorised options: one is either pro-automobile, or
pro-bicycle. The electric velomobile shows that there is a
middle-ground, offering hope that both camps might one day unite.


In *[Bicycles Don’t Evolve: Velomobiles and the Modelling of Transport
Technologies](http://books.google.es/books?id=o7qI0e_xpBAC&pg=PA113&lpg=PA113&dq=%22Bicycles+don%27t+evolve:+velomobiles+and+the+modelling+of+transport+technologies%22&source=bl&ots=MSJQ_G-cXq&sig=_tRIlqcrdwS_5S6ALF2gdgCoppc&hl=nl&sa=X&ei=Ncp2UN7RE8eXhQfvkIDwAw&redir_esc=y#v=onepage&q=%22Bicycles%20don%27t%20evolve%3A%20velomobiles%20and%20the%20modelling%20of%20transport%20technologies%22&f=false)*,
Peter Cox and Frederik Van De Walle (the latter designed the WAW)
advocate the velomobile as a new, separate class of vehicles. They argue
that the legal uncertainty surrounding the velomobile is a consequence
of a pseudo-Darwinist view on the development of vehicle technology (and
technology in general). According to this mental model, the bicycle
'evolved’ during the early 20th century into the faster motorcycle and
next into the faster and more comfortable automobile, implying a
logically ordered series of improvements which reflects an inevitable
progress and an increasing rationality.

>The electric velomobile calls into question the validity of the existing
vehicle categories


Any form of transport ’further back’ along the evolutionary narrative is
rendered lesser, anachronistic and outmoded by its superior, more
evolved ’offspring’. This is why, when we are discussing sustainable
transportation options for the future, we invariably start from the
automobile&mdash;witness the consecutive hypes on hydrogen cars,
bio-fuelled cars, compressed-air cars, and electric cars. Cycles, on the
other hand, are (in most western countries) considered to be vehicles
driven in leisure time, or for people who cannot afford a car.

The (electric) velomobile does not fit in this mental model, and
therefore it proves its invalidity. The speed of the electric velomobile
approaches the speed of a motorcycle or automobile, while the ergonomic
seating position and the protective bodywork can make it almost as
comfortable as a car. Because the electric velomobile achieves all this
with just a fraction of the energy used by a motorcycle or car, it can
hardly be considered an obsolete or old-fashioned alternative. Moreover,
the electric velomobile is as expensive to buy as a (very) small car
(the eWAW costs 7,790 Euro), while we assume that cycles cost much less
than cars.



Cox and Van De Walle propose an alternative conceptual framework, a
matrix consisting of four categories of vehicles (see the diagram
above): bicycle, motorcycle, velomobile and automobile. The difference
between bicycle and motorcycle is also the difference between velomobile
and automobile: the addition or omittance of a motor. The difference
between motorcycle and automobile is also the difference between bicycle
and velomobile: from an open to a closed form, that is, from riding ’on'
to riding ‘in’. The limits of the four categories are not strict: a
partial or removable bodywork blurs the morphological distinction
(examples are the [Hase
Klimax](http://hasebikes.com/215-1-pedelec-velomobile-e-trike-with-foldable-fairing-klimax.html)
and the [BMW C1](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/BMW_C1)), while the use of
an auxiliary motor for assistance blurs the motorisation distinction (as
in electric bicycles and electric velomobiles).

> Electric velomobiles, being a hybrid between a velomobile and an
> automobile, can be designed in many different ways.

Thus, Cox and Van De Walle present an overview of the different types of
individual transport technologies&mdash;and their hybrids&mdash;without the
implicit hierarchy of values in what they call the ’evolinear model’. In
this mental framework, the automobile dominates. By introducing the
velomobile as a fourth category, this is no longer the case. However, in
the new mental framework, the automobile is not considered an enemy.
Electric velomobiles, being a hybrid between a velomobile and an
automobile, can be designed in many different ways. The eWAW comes very
close to the unassisted velomobile. But electric velomobiles that come
closer to automobiles are a possibility, too.

##Pimp up your Velomobile

There are roughly five variations in the design of an electric
velomobile. In the first, the input of the driver is larger than that of
the electric motor. This is the class of vehicles that the eWAW belongs
to, if used properly. Such a vehicle would adhere to the legal
description of an electrically-assisted cycle in the European Union,
with the exception that the speed limit of the electric assistance is
twice as high (50 instead of 25 km/h) to reflect the higher cruising
speed of a velomobile. In the second configuration, the input of the
driver is equal to the input of the motor. The only difference from the
first configuration is that the motor also assists the driver at
cruising speed, up to a limit of 45 or 50 km/h. This is the class of
vehicles that the eWAW belongs to, the way I drove it.



[Windexplorer](http://www.wind-explorer.com/index.php/start_en).

In the third configuration, the input of the electric motor is larger
than the input of the driver. A more powerful motor would result in a
faster acceleration and a higher climbing speed (and thus in a higher
average speed), but not in a higher top speed because the electric
assistance is shut off at 45 to 50 km/h. It would further reduce the
effort needed to maintain cruising speed (if the driver is fit), or make
it even easier for people with an average fitness level to reach higher
cruising speeds.

This type of velomobile exists in Germany, where more powerful motors
and higher speeds are allowed if the vehicle is registered as a moped.
Examples are the [500 watt Alleweder 4 and the 600 watt Alleweder
6](http://www.akkurad.com/html/alleweder.html), the 750 watt [Aerorider
Sport](http://www.aerorider.nl/en/sunrider.html), and the 500 watt [Hase
Klimax
5K](http://hasebikes.com/257-1-pedelec-velomobile-e-trike-with-foldable-fairing-klimax-5k.html)
(not a real velomobile but a recumbent with a foldable bodywork, which
can “zip off from the stoplight faster than some roadsters”). The
Aerorider puts the additional motor power to use in another way: it has
a more luxurious interior design, resembling that of a car, which adds
comfort but also weight (the vehicle weighs 55 kg).

> Because the eWAW is 80 times more efficient than an electric car,
> there is quite some room for pimping up a velomobile.

The fourth possibility is to do away with the speed limitation
altogether. This can be applied to all configurations described above.
The motor would assist the driver automatically to whatever possible
speed. The top speed will depend on the output of both the motor and the
driver. These vehicles are not on the market, but it is possible to
adapt one of the above described velomobiles by removing the sensor that
shuts off the motor at whatever maximum speed lawmakers have decided,
and by mounting higher gears. There is no mechanical limit to the speeds
that this type of velomobile could achieve. There is no reason why a
velomobile can’t go as fast as 120 km/h (75 mph). In fact, the speed
record for an *unassisted* velomobile stands at more than 130 km/h (80
mph).

##Trading efficiency and range for speed or comfort

In the fifth and last configuration we do away with the automatic
activation of the motor, which is now standard in all electric cycles.
In this case, the driver decides when the motor operates. This can be
applied to all configurations, and the effect is always the same: the
motor can also be operated when the driver is not pedalling at all. The
adapted eWAW that I drove could be driven in this way for about 60 km at
a speed of about 30 km/h&mdash;still fast enough to overtake all but the
speediest cyclists. This is not a particularly exciting but nevertheless
very pleasant way of travelling&mdash;and the bodywork makes sure that
nobody knows you’re not pedalling.


[Windexplorer](http://www.wind-explorer.com/index.php/start_en).

The possible configurations for electric velomobiles include
electrically-assisted cycles, driver-assisted motorcycles, and fully
motorised vehicles. With every step, efficiency and range is traded for
speed or comfort. A more powerful motor will demand more of the battery.
More batteries can be added to make up for the decreased range, but this
will increase weight and thus decrease efficiency. However, because the
eWAW is 80 times more efficient than an electric car, there is quite
some room for pimping up a velomobile. The Alleweders with more powerful
motors can be bought in Germany with batteries of 1,664 Wh&mdash;that’s
still 14 times more efficient than the Nissan Leaf, for a similar range.

Even a fully electric velomobile speeding at 100 km/h and packed with
batteries would still be more efficient than a Nissan Leaf. We have
argued repeatedly that automobiles should become
[lighter]({filename}/posts/citroen-2cv.md) and
[slower]({filename}/posts/speed-energy.md) in
order to become more efficient, but of course the same results could be
obtained by making cycles faster and heavier.

[Kris De Decker](http://www.krisdedecker.org/) (edited by [Deva
Lee](http://theculturemuncher.com/))


Related articles:

* [The velomobile, high-tech bike or low-tech
    car]({filename}/posts/the-velomobile-high-tech-bike-or-low-tech-car.md)?
    A previous article on non-assisted velomobiles, showing many of the
    models available today
* [How to make everything
    ouserlves]({filename}/posts/how-to-make-everything-ourselves-open-modular-hardware.md):
    open modular hardware
* [Cargo cyclists replace truck drivers on European city
    streets]({filename}/posts/jobs-of-the-future-cargo-cyclist.md)
* [The status quo of electric
    cars]({filename}/posts/the-status-quo-of-electric-cars-better-batteries-same-range.md):
    better batteries, same range
* [The age of
    speed]({filename}/posts/speed-energy.md):
    how to reduce global fuel consumption by 75 percent?
* [The Citroen
    2CV]({filename}/posts/citroen-2cv.md):
    cleantech from the 1940s
* [Cars, out of the
    way]({filename}/posts/get-rid-of-cars-ride-a-bicycle.md):
    we don’t need bike lanes, what we need is to clear the existing
    roads of inefficient vehicles and replace them with efficient ones.
* [Why bicycles are faster than
    cars](http://www.notechmagazine.com/2010/04/the-industrialization-of-traffic-why-bicycles-are-faster-than-cars.html):
    the industrialisation of traffic
* [Pedal powered farms and
    factories]({filename}/posts/pedal-powered-farms-and-factories.md):
    the forgotten future of the stationary bicycle
* Short posts on [pedal
    power](http://www.notechmagazine.com/pedal-power/) and [low-tech
    cars](http://www.notechmagazine.com/low-tech-cars/) at [No Tech
    Magazine](http://www.notechmagazine.com/).
