Title: Cars: out of the way
Date: 2009-10-26 13:42
Author: Kris De Decker
Category: Low-tech Solutions
Tags: bicycle, bicycles, bikes, commute, transport, transportation
Slug: get-rid-of-cars-ride-a-bicycle
Status: published



Some readers have observed that we haven't paid any attention to one of
the most low-tech innovations ever - the humble bicycle. We noted the
sex-appeal of pedal power (and this concerns both
[men](http://www.notechmagazine.com/2009/04/macho-pedal-power.html) and
[women](http://www.notechmagazine.com/2009/09/cycle-chics.html)), but
that's about it.

So, since you asked for it, here is our concise but clear point of view
on these human powered contraptions.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

We don't need any new infrastructure, what we need is to clear the
existing infrastructure of inefficient vehicles and replace them with
efficient ones




I hope that bikes - unlike [oven
stoves]({filename}/posts/tile-stoves.md),
[moonlight
towers]({filename}/posts/moonlight-towers-light-pollution-in-the-1800s.md)
or
[trolleybuses]({filename}/posts/trolleytrucks-trolleybuses-cargotrams.md)
- don't require an introduction. But, to be sure, for those of you who
have been moving exclusively from office garage to home garage via
automobile and nothing else for most of your life: a bicycle is a
two-wheeled, pedal-powered vehicle that was invented [almost 150 years
ago](http://www.americanheritage.com/articles/magazine/it/1992/4/1992_4_48.shtml)
and can still be seen on the streets today. If you slow down a bit in
that car, you will be sure to spot one.

Initially, the bicycle was quite a dangerous contraption. But, by the
end of the 19th century, after the invention of the pneumatic tyre and
the chain drive (so that the velocity of the vehicle was no longer
determined by the diametre of the front wheel) it became a very popular
means of transportation - a period that historians now label the
"bicycle craze". Bikes were definitely the "it thing" back in the day,
as these paragraphs from a [1896 New York Times
article](http://query.nytimes.com/gst/abstract.html?res=9C01E0D7173BEE33A2575AC1A9679C94679ED7CF&scp=1&sq=big+cycle+show+opened&st=p)
illustrate:

*"Young men used to save up their money to buy a horse or a watch. Now,
they save to buy a bicycle, and there are thousands who are cutting off
unnecessary expenses in the way of clothing, cigars, and amusements and
luxuries, so as to possess a wheel."*

*"So great was the crowd assembled in Madison Avenue at 7:30 last
evening that the doors of the Madison Square Garden had to be thrown
open in order to clear the street, and so the third annual bicycle show
was opened a half hour before the hour originally decided upon."*

What bikes can do

One more thing that beginners should know is this: bicycles are not only
suited to transport people, but also to carry goods.There are many
sturdy cargo bikes around these days, some of which are inspired by
traditional models, and others not.



The [amount of stuff you can move around by mere pedal power is
surprising]({filename}/posts/jobs-of-the-future-cargo-cyclist.md).
In short, with the modest bicycle it is possible to transport anything
usually transported by cars or vans (your suitcase, design furniture, a
lover - sorry to focus on the sex appeal again but I am trying to catch
your attention here).

What bikes need


themselves are a mature technology with not that much to improve upon.
They don't need rails, overhead lines, traffic management systems, smart
grids, gas stations, batteries or superconductors - but they do need. This is where the trouble begins. It is interesting to note
that the first smooth roads were built for bikes, and not for cars.
Alas, that was a time before the arrival of the automobile made an end
to the bicycle craze.

Today, bicycle roads are inadequate or non-existent in most parts of the
world. As a result, riding a bike is dangerous at the very least and
plain suicide at worst, in spite of the pneumatic tyres and chain drive.
The reason for this is simple: cars rule the roads. It does not matter
whether cars drive on gasoline, diesel, batteries, biofuels, hydrogen,
hot air, dead rabbits or coffee husk: their sheer existence and number
makes another bicycle craze almost impossible.

The good intentions


In order to solve this, there is more and more talk surrounding the
implementation of bicycle highways. The idea itself is not a new one:
the [comfortable
ride](http://www.sierraclub.org/sierra/200803/bikeway.asp) offered by
the elevated [CycleWay in
California](http://www.cyclewaycoffee.net/historic-california-cycleway-photos.htm)
more than [100 years
ago](http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/infrastructure/the_great_cycle_way_.cfm) is
still unrivalled anywhere in the world today. Some countries, most
notably the Netherlands and Denmark, are making progress with fast, safe
and separate roads for bikes, tagging them as "[bicycle
highways](http://www.copenhagenize.com/search/label/%22bike%20infrastructure%22)".


Creative minds have designed elevated bicycle roads inspired by the long
gone CycleWay (but [not nearly as
sturdy](http://www.design21sdn.com/competitions/11/entries/3217/gallery)
if you ask me). Even [more creative
minds](http://www.velo-city.ca/MainFrameset.html) have designed elevated bicycle highways that protect bikers from rain, wind and
pigeon poop. Some of these tunnels even have the potential to [generate
artificial tailwinds](http://www.biketrans.com/) that would make you go
twice as fast. They will be heated in winter and cooled in summer.

The solution

While all these ideas are substantially better than many other
inventions that are being designed these days ([carbon capture
technology]({filename}/posts/carbon-capture.md),
[algal
fuel]({filename}/posts/algae-fuel-biof.md) and
[nanotech
batteries]({filename}/posts/nanotechnolog-1.md)
spring to mind) this is not the way to go.


problem is not that there is a lack of good roads - enough of these
exist to bike from here to Mars and beyond. The main problem is that
these are occupied by automobiles that are not only dangerous but also
very inefficient both in terms of energy use and floor space.

We don't need any new infrastructure, what we need is to clear the
existing infrastructure of inefficient vehicles and replace them with
efficient ones. In other words: give all streets, highways, cloverleaves
and motorways exclusively to bicycles and all [other human powered
wheeled vehicles](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/velomobiles/). Get rid
of cars. Why make things so complicated if the solution is so simple?

The arguments

Yes, I do want the motorway. It takes me more than an hour to pedal from
my town to the city, because half of the time I am waiting in front of a
traffic light watching cars passing me by.


If I could ride up one of the many large highways or motorways that lead
almost straight into the city, I would be there in less than 20 minutes.
If driving from A to B at a stretch was an exclusive privilege for cars
for so long, then why can it not be an exclusive right for a much more
efficient mode of transport? The views aren't bad either.

The transportation problem will never be solved unless we eradicate cars
completely. As we don't have the courage to do that, all else we try
will be in vain. Streets have a limited capacity and there are few
places where you can give all transport modes - pedestrians, bikers,
cars, public transport - all that they need.

In order to find a solution, we need to eliminate the most inefficient
vehicle type. This is definitely the automobile - their hunger for space
ends up being an even larger (but underestimated) problem than their
hunger for fuel.

The new roads

Picture this for a second. If cars are gone, we are left with
pedestrians (on the sidewalk), pedal powered vehicles (one part of the
streets and the highways) and public transportation (another part of the
streets and the highways, separated from pedal powered traffic, or
underground). Taxis are allowed to stay, as long as they are equipped
with pedals and chain drives.


can maintain all possibilities that we have today: bikes for people who
prefer their personal means of transportation (freedom!). Public
transportation for those who prefer not to pedal. It should be noted
that installing thousands and thousands of showers is definitely a more
cost-effective option than unfolding a [charging infrastructure for
electric
cars]({filename}/posts/fast-charging-electric-cars-off-peak-grid.md).
Maybe it is time for a revival of public baths?

For long distance passenger transport, we have
[trains]({filename}/posts/train-travel.md). For
long distance cargo transport, trains again. Short distance cargo
transport could see the revival of [cargo
trams](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2009/07/trolleytrucks-trolleybuses-cargotrams.html#cargotrams)
(streetcars). Electric vehicles could be a part of the solution, too,
both for [cargo
transport](http://www.notechmagazine.com/2009/10/cargohopper.html) and
for the disabled, provided they keep the same speed as bicycle traffic.
Roads would still be available for motorised ambulances, firetrucks and
- some - police cars, they have sirens for that.

The result? A healthy population, smooth traffic, clean air, silent and
safe roads, and oil independence. The beauty? No money or new technology
required.

Â© Kris De Decker (edited by Shameez Joubert)

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
   
   
   
   
 ------------------------------------------------------------------------

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Related :

-   
    The
    "[Crimanimalz](http://www.wired.com/autopia/2008/05/in-a-city-built/)"
    regularly dive into motorway traffic with a bunch of experienced
    cyclists, just to show that bikes are faster than cars during rush
    hour. Their site hosts many
    [videos](http://www.vimeo.com/crimanimalz) of their rides - but if
    you try this at home please take care as some car drivers that lose
    to these speedy cyclists have been known to suddenly open their car
    doors - on purpose. The monthly [Critical Mass bike
    rides](http://criticalmass.wikia.com/wiki/Main_Page) are less
    extreme, and less dangerous, but they aim to carry the same message.
    You can easily join them every last friday of the month in [most
    cities around the
    world](http://criticalmass.wikia.com/wiki/List_of_rides).

<!-- -->

-   Many of the bike tech links above were found via [Lloyd
    Alter](http://www.treehugger.com/authors/index.php?author=lloyd)
    from Treehugger. Some interesting sites that cover bicycle news are
    [Bikehugger](http://bikehugger.com/), [Bike
    Commuters](http://www.bikecommuters.com/), [Bicycle
    Design](http://bicycledesign.blogspot.com/),
    [BikeHacks](http://bikehacks.com/), [Commute by
    Bike](http://commutebybike.com/), [Copenhagen Cycle
    Chic](http://www.copenhagencyclechic.com/) and the [Center for
    Appropriate Transport](http://www.catoregon.org/).

<!-- -->

-   [Why bicycles are faster than
    cars](http://www.notechmagazine.com/2010/04/the-industrialization-of-traffic-why-bicycles-are-faster-than-cars.html)

<!-- -->

-   [The
    velomobile]({filename}/posts/the-velomobile-high-tech-bike-or-low-tech-car.md):
    high-tech bike or low-tech car?

<!-- -->

-   [Electric
    velomobiles]({filename}/posts/electric-velomobiles.md):
    as fast and comfortable as an automobile, but 80 times more
    efficient

<!-- -->

-   [Cargo cyclists replace truck drivers on European city
    streets]({filename}/posts/jobs-of-the-future-cargo-cyclist.md)

<!-- -->

-   [Pedal powered farms and
    factories]({filename}/posts/pedal-powered-farms-and-factories.md):
    the forgotten future of the stationary bicycle

<!-- -->

-   [How to downsize a transport
    network]({filename}/posts/the-chinese-wheelbarrow.md):
    the Chinese wheelbarrow

  

  

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
