Title: Hand powered drilling tools and machines
Date: 2010-12-15 03:18
Author: Kris De Decker
Category: Low-tech Solutions
Tags: auger, bow drill, breast drill, breast drills, drill, drilling tool, drilling tools, drills, eggbeater, geared drill, gimlet, hand brace, hand drill, hand drills, hand powered drill, hand powered drills, mechanical advantage, millers falls, pump drill, reamer, strap drill
Slug: hand-powered-drilling-tools-and-machines
Status: published


Hand-powered devices have been used for millennia. However, during the
last quarter of the 19th century a radically improved generation of
tools appeared.

These tools took advantage of modern mass production machinery and
processes (like interchangeable parts) and an increased availability in
superior material (metal instead of wood).

One of the outcomes included an array of new drilling machines. These
human-powered tools were not only a vast improvement over those that
came before them, they also had many advantages in comparison to the
power drills that we use today.

A 1922 breast drill ([picture credit](http://oldtoolheaven.com/)).


For most of human history, drilling a hole into whatever chosen material
required an extensive amount of time and effort. The first crude
drilling tool was the awl, a sharp stone, flint, copper or bone point
that could be attached to a piece of wood. The awl was pressed against
an object and then rotated by hand, much like a present-day screwdriver.
An alternative primitive method was the "[hand
drill](http://1.bp.blogspot.com/_cEcQt1nHroE/TEz0Vh_EA3I/AAAAAAAAAfo/GWVvzMJyASc/s1600/08_hand_drill_452.jpg)"
or "shaft drill", where a stick was rotated between the palms. Abrasives
such as sand could be used simultaneously to make this drilling method
more effective. These were extremely labour-intensive tasks, especially
when the material that had to be drilled was hardy, like stone.


his study of ancient stone-working technology (see sources), Denys
Stocks came to the conclusion that even with a bronze drill bit it took
up to 5 hours to drill a tiny hole 1 centimetre deep in a hard stone
like quartz. Drilling holes into hard stone was commonplace in ancient
times, for example in construction work and the making of necklaces and
bracelets, so it is not surprising that our forefathers were
investigating more efficient drilling methods with fervour.

Strap drills, bow drills and pump drills

The first step toward mechanisation was the "strap drill" (also known as
"cord drill" or "thong drill"), which offered an increased rotation
speed of the drill bit. The tool consisted of a drill bit attached to a
longer wooden shaft, which was rotated by wrapping a cord or leather
strap once around it and holding the ends with one's hands; by pulling
in one direction and then the other, the shaft spun and drilled into the
material. The top of the shaft rotated freely in a mouthpiece which was
held [between the user's
teeth](http://lincolnpalmer.smugmug.com/Projects/100-Portraits/20100912Rabbitstick0142/1012825152_uQaSt-XL.jpg)
to exert more downward pressure. The tool was also used to make fire,
which is the reason why it is also known as a "fire drill".


strap drill was widely used, but was eventually superseded by the "[bow
drill](http://www.newadventure.ca/welcome/12_bow_drill_427.jpg)", which
appeared at least 6,000 years ago in Egypt. Based on the cord drill, the
difference was that the cord or strap, again wrapped once around the
shaft, was tied to a bow. Holding the drill vertically and the bow
horizontally, the user then moved the bow backward and forward - much
like a cellist - to revolve the shaft (picture on the right, by [Rudolf
Hommel](http://openlibrary.org/works/OL6821101W/China_at_work)).


bow drill possessed two advantages over the strap drill: the shaft could
be rotated at a higher speed, and as only one hand was needed to handle
the bow, downward pressure could be exerted with the other hand instead
of the mouth. Smaller bow drills were also used for dental care. The
tool could be made from a few pieces of wood, a piece of string and a
drill bit. A later improvement to the bow drill was the [pump
drill](http://www.wildwoodsurvival.com/survival/fire/pumpdrill/pumpdrill01.html),
which appeared in Roman times (picture on the left,
[source](http://www.primitiveways.com/Kahiko_workshops3.html)). It is
similarly operated, except it functions by means of a downward instead
of sideward movement. Sandor Nagyszalancy explains how it works in his
book "[Tools Rare and
Ingenious](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/1561586560?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=1561586560)":

*"Pump drills get their name from the way they're used. Pumping the
crossbar up and down causes a string to wind and unwind at the shaft,
thus spinning a pointed bit that's fastened to the end of the shaft back
and forth. The thick, rounded section just above the bit serves as a
small flywheel to keep the spinning motion going."*


Once more, the pump drill offered superior rotating speeds and more
downward pressure. All these ancient drills were used in conjunction
with a sharp drill point or with the help of abrasives (especially when
drilling through stone). Pump and bow drills (which could not work
without [ropes and
knots]({filename}/posts/lost-knowledge-ropes-and-knots.md))
are among the most successful tools ever made. Bow drills were still
used in the western world at the end of the 19th century by carpenters
for drilling small or delicate holes, whilst small pump drills are still
sold today as a [tool for
jewellers](http://www.kernowcraft.com/products/silversmithing-and-tools/silversmithing-tools/bow-drill-C63/).

Bow and thong drills operated by several people

The Chinese were especially keen on the above drilling tools. They
relied on bow, pump and thong drills up until the beginning of the
twentieth century and never developed any of the drilling tools that
will be discussed further below. Rudolf Hommel photographed some of the
Chinese drilling devices in his book "China at work". Chinese
shipbuilders employed a larger version of the thong drill which was
operated by two to three people. It was used for drilling the
preliminary holes for the iron spikes which they utilized in ship
construction. Henry Chapman Mercer describes the tool in his 1929 book
"[Ancient Carpenters'
Tools](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0486409589?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0486409589)":

*"To work the apparatus, the thong is twisted around the spindle,
whereupon one man holds down the pivot handle, thereby pressing down the
drill bit into the wood, while two other man, each grasping the thong by
one of its terminal handles, or one man holding a thong-handle in each
hand and pulling the thong to and fro, cause the drill to twirl back and
forth, as with the common bow drill."*


The thong drill. Picture from "[China at
work](http://openlibrary.org/works/OL6821101W/China_at_work)" by Rudolf
Hommel.

According to some historians, the Egyptians also made use of large bow
drills operated by several people to make large holes (and to hollow out
spaces) in their pyramids. Bronze hollow tubes of about 11 centimetres
in diameter in conjunction with abrasives would have been used as a
drill bit ("tube drills" or "core drills"), after which the remaining
core is then carefully removed. Even larger holes could have been made
by performing several drilling operations right next to each other, in a
circular form. The core drill allows for larger holes without
sacrificing drilling speed, because much less material has to be reduced
to powder.


Denys Stocks conducted real-life experiments to see if this method could
work, and succeeded. The
[results](http://findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_hb3284/is_282_73/ai_n28754841/)
indicate that two drillers were required to push and pull a large bow,
while a third person balanced a stone drill-cap on top of the shaft to
exert downward pressure. Stocks achieved a drilling speed of 2
centimetres per hour in granite stone, and thinks the ancient Egyptians
could have reached speeds of 12 cm per hour.

Whether or not the ancient Egyptians applied this technique remains open
to debate, though. Archaeological remains of these tools have never been
found, and unlike smaller drilling operations (common bow drills, stone
drills to hollow out granite vases) these large-scale operations were
only [vaguely alluded
to](http://www.metmuseum.org/Works_of_Art/collection_database/egyptian_art/facsimile_painting_from_the_tomb_of_inyotef_nina_de_garis_davies//objectview.aspx?OID=100000882&collID=10&dd1=10)
in wall paintings.


Augers, gimlets and reamers

Another very important invention from Roman times was the T-shaped
[auger](http://www.medievalwoodworking.org/vld_tools/joiner.jpg) (and
the much smaller
[gimlet](http://www.windsorpubliclibrary.com/digi/baw/images/artifacts/gimlet.jpg)).
Basically a long drill bit with a pair of wooden handles for rotating
it. The tool looks a like an oversized corkscrew (picture on the left,
[source](http://www.fullchisel.com/blog/)). Augers were used to drill
large and/or deep holes in wood, for which the bow or pump drill was not
very useful. They were applied by shipbuilders, bridgebuilders,
millwrights, wheelwrights and the like.

In the Middle Ages augers were sometimes equipped with a breastplate on
top for more drilling pressure - the user could rest the entire weight
of his body on the pad. However, operating them was a tedious task. The
Roman writer Vitruvius noted that the difficulty of the boring increased
exponentially with the diameter of the hole. Apart from drilling holes,
an auger was also used for "reaming" - enlarging an already existing
hole.


drilling action of the auger is based on the principle of leverage: the
longer the handle, the greater the potential of applied force.

Some augers and reamers were huge and had to be operated by several
people. One example is the wheelwrights' reamer, which was used to core
the hub of a wheel in order to receive a metal bearing.

This was again no easy task, because if the hole was not perfectly
straight the wheel would hobble along on the axle. Augers and reamers
were essential tools until the end of the 19th century. Eric Sloane
describes (and illustrates, on the right) the use of the tool in his
1964 book "[A Museum of Early American
Tools](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0486463036?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0486463036)![](http://www.assoc-amazon.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=as2&o=1&a=0486463036){width="1"
height="1"}":

*"Oddly enough, the experts have not decided just how these reamers were
used. But I rigged up a wagon wheel on a wheelwright's bench, then put a
hooked reamer through the hub, which I had weighted with 75 pounds. With
two men turning a very long detachable handle it worked nicely. With an
ordinary reamer, a man exerts about half its weight downward; this can
be bettered with a 75 pound weight plus the 25 pound weight of the tool
itself."*

Pipe and pump augers

Another spectacular example was the pipe auger (and pipe reamer). These
tools were used to bore water pipes from tree trunks. This kind of
wooden water pipes was quite common in towns and smaller cities from the
15th to the 17th century, notes Maurice Daumas in "[Histoire générale
des techniques, tome
2](http://www.abebooks.co.uk/search/sortby/3/an/Daumas+/tn/+Histoire+Generale+Des+Technique)"
(illustration below, Maurice Dumas).



Stephen Shepherd, author of the [Full Chisel
Blog](http://www.fullchisel.com/blog/), explains how the pipe auger is
operated:

*"This type of bit will follow the center of the tree (they selected
good straight trunks of the appropriate diameter) so the hole will be
centered. What is unusual about this arrangement is the very long shank
and the interchangeable bits and reamers. Some pipe auger handles were
segmented and lengths could be added as needed. The shanks were slightly
longer than the logs being made into water pipes. Twenty feet \[6
metres\] is not an uncommon length."*

*"There is a permanent set-up to do the work. Saw bucks or stantions to
hold the log and smaller ones to hold the shank of the bit in the proper
location. After the pilot hole is bored, the bit is changed out to a
reamer to enlarge the hole. In order to facilitate the reaming, a rope
is run through the hole and fixed to the hook on the end of the reamer.
Now the work gets easy for the fellow twisting the handle as he no
longer needs to push the auger, the fellow on the other end pulls the
rope (also one with weights), pulling the reamer through the pilot hole
enlarging the opening, as the handle is twisted."*


Illustration by Stephen Shepherd, [Full Chisel
Blog](http://www.fullchisel.com/blog/?p=112).

This took quite some time. In his 1751 "Encyclopédie", Diderot writes
that one man could bore a 5 cm diameter hole through 11.6 metres of pipe
per day in alder or elm, but only 1.95 metres per day in oak. A similar
method was used for boring the barrels of muskets and cannons, and for
making wooden water pumps to get water up from wells or chisels.

Continuous versus reciprocating drills

The arrival of the auger did not nullify the bow and pump drills. Each
had their advantages and drawbacks because they work in totally
different ways. Firstly, with a bow or pump drill, downward pressure is
applied by one hand, while with an auger it is applied by two hands.
Second, the auger turns slowly in one direction, while the pump and bow
drill work by quick reciprocating revolutions in both directions. The
auger pares the wood into shavings as it goes down; the pump or bow
drill pulverizes the wood into sawdust. The result is that the auger is
much better suited to drill large holes, but not useful to make holes in
materials other than wood. On the other hand, pump and bow drills will
only drill comparatively small holes (with the possible exception of the
large Egyptian tools), but can be used for drilling holes in all kinds
of materials that need to be pulverized instead of pared: stone, marble
or metal, for example.

Medieval breakthrough: the hand brace


While augers remained essential tools for large diameter holes until the
end of the 1800s, the Middle Ages brought an important drilling
innovation when it came to somewhat smaller holes: the "hand brace" or
"bitstock". It introduced - for the first time in history - a drilling motion. Both bow drills and augers worked by means
of intermittent rotations, and during the short pause in between turns
the drill bit had the tendency to get stuck.

The U-shaped body of the brace solved this problem. The user turned the
handle continuously while exerting downward pressure with the hand or
the chest on the pad (some later braces, the [cage-head
braces](http://www.greatplanestrading.com/FULLER/INDY0067.jpg), had a
larger breastplate). Braces came in many different sizes, with lengths
varying from 10 centimetres or less to tools almost half a metre long.

The earliest representation of the hand brace dates from 1425, when it
appears on a
[painting](http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/2/2e/Robert_Campin_-_L%27_Annonciation_-_1425.jpg)
by the Flemish artist Robert Campin. The [oldest surviving
brace](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:MaryRose-carpentry_tools1.jpg)
was recovered from an English ship that sank in 1545. Hand braces have
remained in use ever since, although they can be difficult to find
today. From the 15th to the beginning of the 19th century, braces
improved only moderately. Early wooden braces were made with bits
permanently attached, while later models had crude mechanisms for
interchangeable bits. The shape of the tool hardly changed, but there
was an evolution in the materials used.



English hand braces. Source: [Hans Brunner
Tools](http://www.hansbrunnertools.gil.com.au/).

Most medieval hand braces were made almost entirely out of wood
(sometimes even a naturally curved limb of a tree) with some minor iron
reinforcements, and - of course - an iron drill bit. Later models were
heavily reinforced with metal plates. Some braces were very crude, while
others may be considered works of art. The early 19th century
"Ultimatum" braces made by William Marples, crafted from japanned ivory
or exotic wood (ebony, rosewood) and decorated with engraved and
polished brass sidings, were famous for their aesthetic appeal.

Modern hand powered drilling tools

The next revolution in hand powered drilling tools only occured at the
end of the 19th century, with the arrival of much improved hand braces
and a whole new class of drilling tools: geared drills and boring
machines, which took over the heavy duties from augers. They were much
more powerful and versatile than their predecessors, but unfortunately
their success did not last long. Half a century later they were almost
completely superseded by electric power drills. As a result, many people
are not even aware of the existence of these remarkable tools.



A rare 1880 combination of hand brace and geared drill,
[source](http://oldtoolheaven.com/galleries/Backus/Backusgallery.htm)

In the overview of modern hand powered drilling tools that follows, I
will focus almost exclusively on the products of one enterprise: the
Millers Falls Company from New York. Although there were a few important
competitors, notably Goodell Pratt and North Brothers, Millers Falls
dominated the market in the US and their tools are generally regarded as
the best. Moreover, since the US became the forerunner of early mass
production techniques, these tools became an example for most European
manufacturers too.

Cheap steel and interchangeable parts

The improvement of drilling devices was mainly the consequence of the
arrival of cheap steel and the invention of interchangeable parts. Randy
Roeder, author of a splendid
[website](http://oldtoolheaven.com/index.html) dedicated to Millers
Falls Tools, [summarizes](http://oldtoolheaven.com/brace/brace.htm) the
changes in two paragraphs, using the hand brace as an example:

*"The braces being offered by American companies at this time were among
the finest hand-powered boring devices ever mass produced. The braces of
the 1930s would have been a dream come true for a woodworker a century
earlier. In the early nineteenth century, most braces were made of wood
and prone to breakage if too much torque was applied to them. The forged
iron braces sometimes made by blacksmiths were better in this regard,
but both types were plagued with mechanisms inadequate to hold a bit
securely and incapable adjustment for variations in the size or shape of
a shank."*



1872 patent premium model lever-type ratchet,
[source](http://oldtoolheaven.com/galleries/Backus/Backusgallery.htm)., mounted on a quality steel frame and fitted with
a rotating sweep handle and ball bearing head was considered bottom of
the line. Better models came equipped with a ratchet mechanism allowing
the user to bore a hole without making a full rotation of the sweep.
Some of the best braces were manufactured with all or part of the
ratchet mechanism enclosed, or “boxed.” Premium models came equipped
with chucks which allowed for bits with a variety of shanks to be used.
Fit and finish, of course, played a role in determining the eventual
cost of the tool. "*


Hand and breast drills

Apart from the improvement of the centuries-old hand brace, a whole new
range of drilling tools appeared - most notably, so-called geared
drills. The earliest picture of a geared drill appears in 1816 and the
first geared drill patent is from 1838. It is most likely that they
originated in France, perhaps as late as the end of the 1700s. Geared
drills finally offered metal workers an alternative to the 6,000 year
old bow drill and the 2,000 year old pump drill. [WK Fine
Tools](http://www.wkfinetools.com/), a website dedicated to late 19th
century drilling tools, explains:

*"A geared drill transfers its power from a vertical hand cranked main
gear to a horizontal pin gear spinning on a shaft connected to a bit
holding device. Depending on the size ratio of main gear to pinion a
greater number of revolutions could be achieved from one turn of the
crank."*

Geared drills (also named "eggbeater drills" - see
[why](http://www.wkfinetools.com/hUS-borTools/NorthBros/patents/0,495,925/0,495,925.asp))
were initially made for drilling in metal, for which higher rotation
speeds are a necessity. However, they were also used for drilling into
soft wood, in which case the mechanical advantage simply led to easier
drilling. Like hand braces, geared drills worked by continuous motion,
but they offered the additional benefit of making the drill turn faster
than the rate at which the crank is turned. Many models also offered the
possibility of changing the bit rotation speed. Geared drills came in
two varieties: "hand drills" and "breast drills". Millers Falls Company
started mass producing them in 1878 and remained market leader ever
since. Randy Roeder explains the differences between the two types:are generally fifteen
inches or less in length, are best suited for drilling holes in wood and
light metals, and are most effective when used by a worker whose body is
positioned above a work piece. They work best when operated at high
speed and are especially useful for accurately drilling small-sized
holes without damaging delicate drill points."*typically exceed fifteen inches and are topped by a concave plate that
provides a surface which the user can lean against when boring a hole.
Sometimes referred to as "chest drills," "belly drills" or "knee
drills," these tools were indispensable in the construction industry, in
blacksmith shops, in factories and in shops where rail cars were
fabricated. Ruggedly built, the drills are useful for boring holes in
iron, steel and extremely tough wood. Designed with the expectation that
a worker would be putting a fair amount of body weight into a task, the
breast drills are especially effective when used in a standing position,
alongside the work piece."*



Breast mills, even though they were human powered, could be very
powerful tools. An example is the Millers Falls No. 13 breast mill
pictured above, which was introduced in the mid-1880s. It had a driver
that was six inches (15 cm) in diameter, which provided for a gear ratio
of 4.5 to 1. This means that the drill bit spun 4.5 times faster than
the user's hand. Later models had even higher gear ratios. The No. 666,
which was introduced in 1937, had a mechanical advantage of more than 7
to 1.

The breastplate replacing the knob did more than merely allowing the
user to push his chest into the drill, notes Stephen Shepherd:

*"It also freed his hands to turn the crank and hold an auxiliary handle
on the pivot and opposite the crown wheel. The length of the arm to the
turning knob varies from a knob mounted to the rim of the wheel, to a
bar that extends beyond the wheel adding to the mechanical advantage."*

More than 200 different models

Hand braces and geared drills came in a surprisingly large variety. In
1915, the inventory of Millers Falls included 28 hand drills, 40 breast
drills and 135 variations on the hand brace - especially the latter
figure is remarkable considering the tool's simplicity.



One example is the Whimble Brace (above), of which the catalogue
description reads as follows: "Ship builders, bridge builders and others
whose work requires an unusually powerful sweep will find this brace a
strong, sturdy tool, capable of standing the rough use to which it is
necessarily put". Or take the "Corner Brace" (below), which was "the
only practical tool for boring in corners and close to walls, and is
indispensable to carpenters, bellhangers and plumbers".



Stationary use

Both braces and hand and breast drills could be mounted in special
frames. The result was a hand powered "drill press", "bench drill",
"post drill" or "beam drill", which further improved the performance of
the tools. An example is the mounted breast drill pictured on the left,
which was presented in 1883 (called the "Universal Hand Drill Press").
The magazine 'Carpentry and Building' devoted an
[article](http://www.wkfinetools.com/hUS-borTools/MillersFalls/inPress/1883-Mounted%20Breast%20Drill/1883-Mounted%20Breast%20Drill.asp)
to it:



*
"A steel frame is provided, in which the No. 10 breast drill may be used
quite advantageously. The drill is held true by the frame, and the work
is held firmly in place by the clamp shown in the engraving. The
lever-feed provided by this arrangement may be operated by hand, or a
weight may be employed, as may be preferred. The advantage of an
attachment of this kind for use in connection with a breast drill is
obvious. Most of the work done by a tool of this character can be better
performed with the drill mounted in the frame. When the breast-drill is
used in the ordinary manner it very frequently requires heavy pressure,
which is quite fatiguing to the workman. In the arrangement shown there
is a leverage of five to one, which makes the feeding an easy matter.
When work is required that cannot be done in the frame, the tool can be
taken out in a very small space of time, and used in the ordinary way."*


Many different frames were available, and the same principle could also
be applied to the hand brace (see the patent illustration below).
Angular and ratchet drilling machines could be attached to broken
machines and swung around so as to drill at a variety of angles (above,
right). Apart from the advantages listed above, this arrangement also
gave the operator the advantage of keeping one hand free. A variant of
such a stationary hand powered tool was the "wood boring machine" (image
on the right,
[source](http://www.mjdtools.com/auction/graphics/a220540.htm)).


two-handed drill was the most powerful model the Millers Falls Company
made, and was introduced in the 1860s. An adjustable model drilled at
any angle, while the wooden base that holds the superstructure is a seat
for the operator to sit on.

Stephen Shepherd used the machine and was impressed:

*"The two hand cranks and gear mechanism makes this an aggressive drill,
even with big twist bits. It easily bores big holes in timber. At the
proper depth, the rack gear is moved to engage a gear and continuous
turning of the hand crank pulls the bit out of the hole with the
greatest of ease."*


A completely different hand powered drilling machine (not manufactured
by Miller Falls) was especially designed for piercing through tough
rocks. The "Ingersoll Hand Power Drill" (image on the left) is pictured
and described in the 1892 encyclopedia "[Modern
Mechanism](http://www.notechmagazine.com/2010/10/exhibiting-the-latest-progress-in-machines-motors-and-the-transmission-of-power-1892.html)":

*"The spring is compressed by the lifting of the cross-head, and its
recoil on release produces the blow, which is delivered dead on the
stone without shock to the men. The spring ordinarily supplied for a
drill to be worked by 2 men is compressed to 200 lbs, and produces with
the momentum of the working rod and drill a blow of about 300 lbs."*


availability

The continued availability of some hand powered drilling tools is at
least as remarkable as their diversity. For instance, the Millers Falls
No.2 hand drill, one of the company's most popular eggbeater drills, was
introduced as early as 1878 and could still be found ([largely
unchanged](http://www.wkfinetools.com/hUS-borTools/MillersFalls/tools/No2HD/mfHDNo2-intro-1.asp))
in their 1981 catalogue - over 100 years after its introduction (see the
picture of a 1903 model on the right,
[source](http://www.wkfinetools.com/hUS-borTools/MillersFalls/tools/No2HD/mfHDNo2-intro-3.asp)).
The No.2 hand drill even survived the introduction of the so-called Buck
Rogers hand drill (picture below), its more radically designed modern
looking cousin with enclosed gears, which appeared in the late 1940s and
was discontinued by 1960. The No.2 is the most spectacular example when
it comes to availability, but most other conventional models remained
available for many decades, too.


Nevertheless, the heydays of modern hand powered drilling tools were
over fast, even before the 1920s began. While Millers Falls had 135
different models of hand braces in its 1915 catalogue, the number of
braces in the catalogue had shrunk to 35 by 1938 and to 13 in 1949.
Randy Roeder explains what happened:

*"The growing preference for electric boring tools was making itself
felt in the workplace, and it is plain that the market could no longer
sustain a huge line of braces, many of them differing only slightly from
another.* *Oddly, the company continued to market breast drills into the
1980s. Although the drills were already an anachronism, competitors were
so few that it had the market pretty much to itself."*


The 1981 Millers Falls catalogue (see the illustration on the right, the
company was bought by Ingersoll-Rand by then) features only 3 braces,
one hand drill and one breast drill. Today, new [hand
braces](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B000JRFJQO?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=B000JRFJQO)![](http://www.assoc-amazon.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=as2&o=1&a=B0013YZRPU){width="1"
height="1"} can still be bought, but they are rare. Breast drills have
disappeared altogether - not one company sells them anymore (update:
they are still for sale, see comments).

Pinnacle of drilling machinery

The interesting thing is that the drilling tools that appeared in the
late 19th century were not only a vast improvement over earlier tools;
they also have many advantages over their present-day successors, the
power drills. Of course, as most modern products, power drills offer the
advantage of convenience: merely pushing a button will do the job. But
that luxury comes at a steep price.

Obviously, modern power drills are dependent on fossil fuels to generate
the electricity for them to use. Any interruption in the electricity
supply will render a power drill utterly useless. The simple operation
of drilling a hole would then be impossible, which is quite remarkable
since less than 100 years ago no electricity was needed to perform the
job almost as quickly as today.


Power drills are also dependent on fossil fuels for the manufacture of
their materials (mostly plastics) and their electronic components, as
well as for the mining of the resources to make these (rare earth metals
included). Naturally, manually powered drills require energy for their
manufacture, too. They are made almost entirely from iron and steel with
nickel plating. But there is a crucial difference to consider here; even
if we assume that the embodied energy of a hand drill is similar to that
of a power drill, it has a much longer service life.

Maintenance and durability

Hand tools that were sold in the 1870s and saved from the junkyard by
antiquarians or nostalgic craftsmen can still perform their tasks
without any problem today, even when they were unused for decades - a
bit of cleaning (using gasoline) was all that it needed. These tools
were made to last. Furthermore, the continued availability of the same
models for many decades guaranteed that spare parts remained available.
A hand powered drill hardly requires any maintenance to be kept in good
shape. Oiling the tool from time to time suffices. After years of
intensive use, they might need new wooden handles, but that's all. An
electric drill requires much more attention, because it consists of much
more parts - and more delicate parts, too.

The electric tool must be opened periodically for cleaning and oiling to
keep it running smoothly. The brushes should be inspected and replaced
from time to time. Wiring and circuits should be checked. In the case of
a corded drill, the cord is prone to damage. The machine has to be kept
away from dust, rain and high temperatures. Etcetera.

The possibility of something breaking down is much higher than in the
case of a hand powered tool. Since it is mostly cheaper and easier to
replace a high-tech product than to repair it, this means that power
drills won't last 100 years or more. They will have to be manufactured
again and again.


if it is maintained good and used for a long time, a cordless power
drill will regularly need new batteries, again raising energy and
material consumption, as well as dependency on a delivery infrastructure
that might not always be there. \[Right: all parts of a 1903 Millers
Falls hand drill,
[source](http://www.wkfinetools.com/hUS-borTools/MillersFalls/tools/No2HD/No2-1903-Anatomy/mfHD-No2-1903-Anatomy-03.asp)\].

Silent, safe, flexible, forgiving

Even when disregarding energy and environmental issues, hand powered
drills offer some real, practical advantages. They are rather silent,
while power drills can produce up to 130 decibels of noise. Their
independence from electricity and batteries also guarantees that you can
use them anywhere you want for as long as you want, unhampered by cords
that are always too short and batteries that never last long enough.
Manually powered drills are also much safer than power drills, and
because of their lower drilling speeds and more direct control,
corrections are much easier to make while drilling a hole (especially
handy for clumsy people like me).Of course, the lower rotation speed can
also be seen as the (only) drawback of a hand powered drill. They can do
all the jobs that we now use power tools for, but for large and/or deep
holes in hard materials this will cost more time and some exercise - and
that's enough for us to laugh at them. Exactly the same issue was found
with [human powered
cranes]({filename}/posts/history-of-human-powered-cranes.md).

Low-tech or high-tech?

We always compare simpler solutions like hand powered drills to modern,
unsustainable machinery, and never to the tools that came before them.
Hand powered drilling tools are indeed low-tech if you compare them to
power drills. However, they are definitely high-tech when you compare
them to bow drills, augers and crude wooden hand braces. The hand drills
that we now disregard are products of the industrial revolution, and
they should not be taken for granted. Efficient hand powered drills
require good steel, mass production factories, and oil to keep their
gears in shape.


powered drilling mill. Source: [Deutsche
Fotothek](http://www.deutschefotothek.de/#%7Chome).

One last thing. It is important to note that this article only discusses
the history of *hand* powered drilling tools and machines. From the late
Middle Ages onwards, large scale drilling and boring was also performed
by animal power, water power and wind power, requiring no human effort
at all. See for example the water powered drilling mill above, which was
used for boring water pipes as an alternative to the pipe auger that was
described earlier.

Large-scale drilling operations became more important at the end of the
19th century, which led to a whole new range of machines equipped with
steam engines and electric motors. No attempts to improve the existing
water and wind powered boring machines with interchangeable parts and
better materials were made.

Kris De Decker (edited by Shameez Joubert)

![](https://www.paypalobjects.com/en_US/i/scr/pixel.gif){width="1"
height="1"}



[COULD WE RUN MODERN SOCIETY ON HUMAN POWER
ALONE]({filename}/posts/could-we-run-modern-society-on-human-power-alone.md)?



The [Human Power Plant](http://www.humanpowerplant.be) project
investigates the possibilities of human energy production in a modern
society. It plans to convert a 22-floor building on the campus of
Utrecht University into an entirely human powered student community.
With a combination of low-tech solutions, lifestyle changes, and some
exercise, it demonstrates that 750 students can live a fossil fuel free
life on campus.



19th century drilling tools:

-   [Milles Fall Home Page (Old Tool
    Heaven)](http://oldtoolheaven.com/index.html) by Randy Roeder.
    General information as well as a description and picture of *every*
    Millers Falls drill tool ever sold including one-hand operated [push
    drills](http://oldtoolheaven.com/driversdrills/drivers-drills.htm)
    which I have ignored here.
-   [WK Fine Tools](http://www.finetools.com/). In-depth information of
    Millers Falls drills and other drilling tools. There is a complete
    [anatomy of the N0.2 hand
    drill](http://www.wkfinetools.com/hUS-borTools/MillersFalls/tools/No2HD/No2-1903-Anatomy/mfHD-No2-1903-Anatomy-01.asp)
    to be found, as well as a broad overview of
    [UK](http://www.wkfinetools.com/hUK/hUK-index.asp) and [US boring
    tools and their
    makers](http://www.wkfinetools.com/hUS-borTools/boring-index.asp)
    (including patent drawings of many tools).
-   [Type study of the Millers Falls No.2 Eggbeater
    Drill](http://www.georgesbasement.com/mfno2typestudy/mfno2types.html)
    by [George Langford](http://www.georgesbasement.com/). More
    information, more links.
-   [Full Chisel Blog](http://www.fullchisel.com/blog/) has a great
    section on drilling tools.
-   [Millers Falls Company catalogue
    1904](http://toolemera.com/Trade%20Catalogs/tradecatalogs190.html)
    at the Toolemera Blog.
-   [Millers Falls Catalogues 1925 (or 1939), 1949 and
    1981](http://www.roseantiquetools.com/id82.html) at Rose Antique
    Tools.
-   [Boring
    Tools](http://www.wkfinetools.com/hUS-borTools/zChuck/boring.htm),
    by Chuck Zitur.
-   [1891
    catalogue](http://www.wkfinetools.com/hUS-borTools/Bartholomew/pubs/barthol-pubs.asp)
    of breast drills and braces manufactured by H.S. Bartholomew.
-   [1923 Goodell-Pratt Company
    catalogue](http://www.wkfinetools.com/hUS-borTools/GoodellPratt/tools/gp-Tools.asp).
-   [1926 Yankee tools
    catalogue](http://www.wkfinetools.com/hUS-borTools/NorthBros/pubs/1926-YankeeTools/1926-YankeeTools-NorthBros.asp).
-   [1930s Metabo tool
    catalogue](http://www.wkfinetools.com/hUS-borTools/zChuck/metabo.htm).
-   [The American Patented Brace
    Database](http://www.mwtca.org/the-gristmill/sample-articles/81-the-american-patented-brace-database.html).
-   [American Mechanical
    Dictionary](http://www.princetonimaging.com/library/mechanical-dictionary/),
    Edward H. Knight, 1881
-   [Modern mechanism; exhibiting the latest progress in machines,
    motors, and the transmission of
    power](http://www.notechmagazine.com/2010/10/exhibiting-the-latest-progress-in-machines-motors-and-the-transmission-of-power-1892.html),
    Benjamin Park, 1892.

Ancient & medieval tools, general history:

-   [A Museum of Early American
    Tools](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0486463036?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0486463036)![](http://www.assoc-amazon.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=as2&o=1&a=0486463036){width="1"
    height="1"}, Eric Sloane, 1964.
-   [Tools Rare and Ingenious: celebrating the world's most amazing
    tools](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/1561586560?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=1561586560),
    Sandor Nagyszalancy, 2004.
-   [Art of Fine
    Tools](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/1561583618?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=1561583618),
    Sandor Nagyszalancy, 2000
-   [Ancient Carpenters'
    Tools](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0486409589?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0486409589),
    Henry Mercer, 1929
-   [The history of woodworking
    tools](http://openlibrary.org/books/OL5977801M/The_history_of_woodworking_tools),
    William Goodman, 1964
-   [One Good Turn: A Natural History of the Screwdriver and the
    Screw](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0684867303?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0684867303)![](http://www.assoc-amazon.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=as2&o=1&a=0684867303){width="1"
    height="1"}, Witold Rybczynski, 2001
-   [China at
    work](http://openlibrary.org/works/OL6821101W/China_at_work), Rudolf
    Hommel, 1937
-   [A study of the primitive methods of
    drilling](http://openlibrary.org/books/OL8423420M/A_Study_of_the_Primitive_Methods_of_Drilling),
    JD Mc Guire, Bulletin of the US National Museum, 1894
-   Drilling and boring tools, Encyclopedia Britannica, 1995 edition
-   [Experiments in Egyptian Archaeology: Stoneworking Technology in
    Ancient
    Egypt](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0415306647?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0415306647)![](http://www.assoc-amazon.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=as2&o=1&a=0415306647){width="1"
    height="1"}, Denys Stocks, 2003
-   [Histoire générale des techniques - tome 2: les premières étapes du
    machinisme](http://www.abebooks.co.uk/search/sortby/3/an/Daumas+/tn/+Histoire+Generale+Des+Technique),
    Maurice Dumas, 1964
-   [Stone sarcophagus manufacture in ancient
    Egypt](http://findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_hb3284/is_282_73/ai_n28754841/),
    Denys Stocks, 1999
-   [The Theban tomb
    series](http://www.metmuseum.org/search/iquery.asp), Nina & Norman
    de Garis Davies, 1943
-   [Beads and bead making at
    Hierakonpolis](http://www.archaeology.org/interactive/hierakonpolis/field09/3.html),
    archaeology.org
-   [Roman
    Woodworking](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0300103417?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0300103417)![](http://www.assoc-amazon.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=as2&o=1&a=0300103417){width="1"
    height="1"}, Roger Bradley Ulrich, 2007
-   [Woodworking tools,
    1600-1900](http://www.wkfinetools.com/hUS/z-USRead/1966-Woodworking%20Tools/1966-Woodworking%20Tools.asp),
    Peter C. Welsh, 1966
-   [Auglets, gimlets and
    braces](http://www.history.org/almanack/life/tools/tlaug.cfm), The
    Colonial Williamsburg Foundation.
-   [Indian pump
    mill](http://www.historicalfolktoys.com/catcont/6007.html),
    Historical Folk Toys (website)

Related articles:

-   [The short history of early pedal powered
    machines]({filename}/posts/history-of-pedal-powered-machines.md)
-   [How to tie the world
    together]({filename}/posts/lost-knowledge-ropes-and-knots.md):
    ropes and knots
-   [Human powered
    cranes]({filename}/posts/history-of-human-powered-cranes.md):
    the sky is the limit
-   [The museum of old
    techniques]({filename}/posts/the-museum-of-old-techniques.md)
-   [Computing without
    electricity]({filename}/posts/computers-antiq.md):
    mechanical calculators
-   [Power from the
    tap]({filename}/posts/power-from-the-tap-water-motors.md):
    water motors
-   [Prison
    treadmills](http://www.notechmagazine.com/treadwheels-treadmills/)
-   [Primitive
    technology](http://www.notechmagazine.com/primitive-technology/)
-   [Automata]({filename}/posts/automata-engineering-for-a-post-oil-world.md):
    engineering for a post-oil world?
-   [Life before
    television]({filename}/posts/turn-off-your-f.md)
-   [The
    velomobile]({filename}/posts/the-velomobile-high-tech-bike-or-low-tech-car.md):
    high-tech bike or low-tech car?
-   [Wind powered
    factories]({filename}/posts/history-of-industrial-windmills.md):
    the history and future of industrial windmills
-   [Ship
    mills]({filename}/posts/boat-mills-bridge-mills-and-hanging-mills.md):
    water powered, floating factories


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

  

  

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
