Title: Heat your house with car tyres and earth
Date: 2007-12-29 19:13
Author: Kris De Decker
Category: Low-tech Solutions
Slug: heat-your-house
Status: published



Energy hungry America teaches the world how to build ecological houses.

A dirt cheap and 100 percent ecological house that has all the comforts
of an ordinary home, without being connected to the electricity grid,
waterworks, sewer system or the natural gas network. It does exist, but
in most countries, building one is not allowed.

An Earthship is a completely self-sufficient house that has a natural
temperature regulation, without the use of a heating system. The
building also generates its own electricity, collects and filters its
own drinking water and cleans its own effluent water. The house is
partly buried into the earth and is constructed mainly with waste
materials; car tyres, aluminium cans and glass bottles. This low-tech
building approach is ecologically as well as economically advantageous.

This autumn, the British coastal city of Brighton approved the
construction of 16 Earthships. It’s the first time that a European city
council has given builders the green light to mass construct this
radical ecological housing form. In the United States nearly one
thousand Earthships have been built, most of them in the desert of New
Mexico. *(Pictures: [Michael Reynolds](http://www.earthship.net%20/))*

> The ecological damage produced by a traditional house is not only the
> consequence of the energy used during its lifetime, but also through
> the building materials required to construct it

Earthships are the brainchild of American architect Michael Reynolds,
who first put the concept into practice in the seventies, during the
first oil crisis. Sharp falling energy prices in the 80’s and 90’s
restricted the idea for a long time to mostly anarchistic communities
and individuals. Recently however, this revolutionary architecture is
slowly gaining credibility in other sections of society. Oil prices
continue to climb and uneasiness surrounding global warming grows.
Moreover, thanks to 30 years of evolution, many of the initial glitches
Earthships faced have been ironed out.



The autonomous nature of an Earthship is not as revolutionary as it was
30 years ago. The technology required to generate energy, filter water
and recycle waste water apart from the existing infrastructure has
significantly advanced. What makes an Earthship special and interesting
these days is that it is mainly built out of waste materials and partly
buried into the earth.

Thick walls

The house has very thick walls, with a diameter of around one metre. The
walls are not made from concrete or bricks, but from piled up car tyres
covered with clay. Every tyre is filled with earth and then tamped down
with a sledge-hammer. Depending on the climate, two to three walls are
surrounded by a heaped up wall, or built into a slope. Combined with a
sun lounge on the south side of the building (the north side on the
southern hemisphere) the construction provides a natural heating and
cooling system.



The solar heat that enters the house through the large windows is
absorbed by the thick walls. The walls have a large thermal mass thanks
to the car tyres and the earth – insulation is extremely effective.
During the night and on cloudy days, the heat is then slowly released.
The same system cools the house in summer, as the surrounding earth and
the car tyres are colder than the open air. Thanks to this natural
air-conditioning, the inside temperature varies from 17 to 24 degrees
all year round.

> "No matter how sensible the idea is, building houses with car tyres
> and aluminium beer cans sounds ludicrous to most politicians*"*

Scrapped car tyres are the foundations of an Earthship. They are the key
to the natural air-conditioning system and they take care of the
solidity of the bearing walls. For non-bearing walls, aluminium cans or
glass bottles are used. The roof and the veranda are made of wood. While
the wood can be re-used, in many instances new wood is preferred.
Because the tyres are completely packed in earth, the walls are also
fireproof – it is impossible for oxygen to reach the rubber. During a
forest fire in New Mexico, the interior of an Earthship was completely
destroyed, but the walls were left intact.



Building houses out of car tyres and cans might sound unconventional,
but the ecological benefit is so large that the concept deserves to be
given some serious consideration. The fact that an Earthship does not
use fossil fuels for heating or electricity (and therefore emits no CO2)
is not even its most important advantage. By using waste material, the
result is even better.

40 million car tyres = 40,000 Earthships

Firstly, great amounts of waste materials can be utilized. In the United
Kingdom alone, 40 million car tyres are dumped annually. The project in
Brighton uses a thousand tyres for one house, which theoretically means
that with the yearly UK supply of dumped tyres, 40,000 Earthships could
be built.

Furthermore, one is re-using, not recycling; a much greener option than
grinding down tyres to produce speed bumps for example, since the waste
is not undergoing an additional industrial, energy consuming process.



Secondly, and even more importantly, by using waste materials, thousands
upon thousands of tonnes of building materials could be saved; concrete,
mortar and bricks. The ecological damage produced by a traditional house
is not only the consequence of the energy used during its lifetime, but
also through the building materials required to construct it.

> More traditional shapes may help with the general acceptance of this
> type of building method by the general public

Concrete production is one of the most energy-intensive industrial
processes that exist. The sector is responsible for ten percent of
global CO2-emissions, which makes it the third highest producer of
greenhouse gases (following transport and energy production). Thus,
building houses using waste materials (whether the buildings are
self-sufficient or not) is an environmental advantage in more ways than
one.



Old buildings are often demolished with the argument that replacement
buildings have better insulation and therefore consume less energy. What
is being overlooked is that both the pulling down of the old house as
well as the building of the new house implicates a huge amount of
building materials and energy ([embodied
energy](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/embodied-energy/)), which
completely negate the advantages of better insulation.

And the cost?

Using waste materials does not necessarily mean than an Earthship is
cheaper than a traditional house – the homes on offer in Brighton will
even be slightly more expensive due to the labour intensive nature of
the Earthship (labour is taxed much more heavily than use of energy or
materials). Although, once the house is built, the extra investment is
quickly recovered as there are no gas, water or electricity bills.

Building an Earthship yourself with some friends could be very cheap,
but is time consuming. The largest Earthships in the United States took
almost ten years to build. If you build one on your own, the biggest
cost would be the purchasing of solar panels and batteries, followed by
the large windows, pumps and filters. Waste materials could be delivered
for free, as people have to pay to get rid of them.

> Unconventional and revolutionary ideas need to be adopted if we want
> to help prevent a worldwide fight for energy

At the moment, there are only a handful of Earthships in Europe, with
half of them built illegally, but the concept following is strong, with
various national organisations promoting the idea. The most pressing
problem is obtaining a building permit. No matter how sensible the idea
is, building houses with car tyres and aluminium beer cans sounds
ludicrous to most politicians.


Most Earthships in the US take on an unconventional form. They have
fairy-tale like features that remind one of the works of architects like
[Gaudí](http://www.bcn.es/gaudi2002/english/index.htm) and
[Hundertwasser](http://www1.kunsthauswien.com/english/hundertwasser.htm).
But others, like the 16 Earthships being built in Brighton (picture
right), hardly look any different from conventional houses. These more
traditional forms may help with the general acceptance of this type of
building method by the general public.

Built up environments

Until now, most Earthships were built in isolated places, where most
people live in built-up urban environments. The problem with the
feasibility of an Earthship is the size of the plot on which it is
built. This plot is significantly larger than the size of a conventional
house.

But the idea is flexible enough to adapt to different situations. When
an Earthship is built, earth mounds are formed, which in turn may
provide support for another Earthship, and so on. The result would be
revolutionary and unconventional. However, in response to the [recent
warnings](http://www.iea.org/Textbase/press/pressdetail.asp?PRESS_REL_ID=239)
from the International Energy Agency, unconventional and revolutionary
ideas need to be adopted if we want to help prevent a worldwide fight
for energy.

© Kris De Decker (edited by Shameez Joubert & Vincent
Grosjean)[h](http://www.lowtechmagazine.be/)([Artículo en
Español](http://www.es.lowtechmagazine.com/2007/12/caldea-tu-casa.html))

Related articles:

-   [The solar envelope: how to heat and cool cities without fossil
    fuels]({filename}/posts/solar-oriented-cities-1-the-solar-envelope.md)
-   [Insulation: first the body, then the
    home]({filename}/posts/body-insulation-thermal-underwear.md)
   &mdash;thermal underwear
-   [Heat your clothes, not your
    house]({filename}/posts/heat-your-clothes-not-your-house.md)
   &mdash;electrically heated clothing
-   [Restoring the Old Way of
    Warming]({filename}/posts/heating-people-not-spaces.md)
   &mdash;Heating People, not Places

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
   
   
   
   
 ------------------------------------------------------------------------

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Earthships are promoted by various organisations:



[http://www.earthship.net](http://www.earthship.net/) (United States &
international)[http://www.earthship.co.uk](http://www.earthship.co.uk/)
(United Kingdom & Europe)<http://www.earthship.co.uk/france/>
(France)[http://www.lowcarbon.co.uk](http://www.lowcarbon.co.uk/)
(United Kingdom-
Brighton)[http://www.earthshipbelgium.be](http://www.earthshipbelgium.be/)
(Belgium)[http://www.owaze.nl](http://www.owaze.nl/)
(Holland)<http://earthship.ea.funpic.de/> (Austria)

  

  

  

