Title: Rings of fire: Hoffmann kilns
Date: 2009-10-19 00:03
Author: Kris De Decker
Category: Low-tech Solutions
Slug: hoffmann-kilns-brick-and-tile-production
Status: published



About a year ago we presented a medieval building technique that could
save large amounts of brick and thus embodied energy in construction:
[timbrel
vaulting]({filename}/posts/tiles-vaults.md).
Turns out that there is also a 19th century brick and tile production
technique that is surprisingly energy efficient: the Hoffmann kiln, a
giant version of the [medieval oven
stove]({filename}/posts/tile-stoves.md).

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The fire is chased around the building in a never ending process that is
extremely energy-efficient

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------



<div>

</div>


A "Hoffmann kiln", "ring oven" or "ring kiln" was a massive oven in
which clay was baked at a temperature of around 1,000째 Celsius (1830째F)
to produce bricks and tiles. It was a circular, elliptical or
rectangular brickwork structure that consisted of an endless tunnel,
divided into 12 to 24 chambers, all interconnected to each other and to
a main flue leading to a large chimney. Each of the chambers also had an
opening through which the bricks were loaded and unloaded, to be closed
by a door or a temporary brick wall.

The chambers were filled with bricks (some 25,000 of them) and fired one
after the other. The heat in one chamber was not only used to bake the
bricks inside, but also to preheat the still to be fired bricks in the
succeeding chambers. Meanwhile, air that was drawn in, through the door
of the chamber where bricks were unloaded, travelled in the opposite
direction and cooled down the already baked bricks in the preceding
rooms. The fire was "chased" around the building in a never ending
process that was extremely energy-efficient. Depending on the size of
the kiln, it took between one and six weeks for the fire to complete a
full circle.



The ring oven was patented in Germany by Frederick Hoffmann in 1858. It
revolutionized the brick and tile production industry because of
multiple reasons: it allowed for a better and more uniform quality of
ceramic goods, it was much more economical both in terms of fuel
consumption and labour costs, and it raised the production output
spectacularly - up to 10 million bricks per factory per year. Population
was growing fast at the beginning of the industrial revolution and brick
producers were struggling to keep up with demand. The Hoffmann kiln
allowed for mass production of bricks and tiles, but despite its
complexity the whole firing process was executed without the use of
machines.

[![Hoffmann ring kiln belonged to Shimotsuke Brickyard Co.,Ltd., built
in 1889, Nogi Town, Tochigi, Japan. Important Cultural Properties of
Japan.](http://krisdedecker.typepad.com/.a/6a00e0099229e8883301a51193ef4d970c-320wi)](http://krisdedecker.typepad.com/.a/6a00e0099229e8883301a51193ef4d970c-pi){.asset-img-link}

Continuous production

The Hoffmann kiln is a so-called "continuous kiln" - it burns 24 hours a
day, 7 days a week, 365 days a year (except when it goes down for
maintenance). Before its invention, bricks and tiles were fired in
so-called "periodic kilns". This method was very time-consuming because
it is essential to ensure that ceramic materials are not heated up and
cooled down too fast. This meant that the fire had to be increased very
slowly and carefully, and that the baked bricks had to remain in the
oven several days after the fire was extinguished. During this whole
period, the periodic oven could not be used to bake a new stack of
bricks. Moreover, the structure itself had to be heated up every time,
and during the firing process most heat was lost through the chimney or
the roof, wasting large amounts of fuel.




original Hoffmann kiln was circular in plan with a large chimney placed
at the centre (illustration above), but this shape was abandoned quickly
for an elliptical outline, and ultimately a rectangular shape with two
parallel tunnels built side by side, connected by curved tunnels at
either end (illustration further below). The chimney could be in the
middle, or next to the building. A rectangular kiln saved space, was
easier to operate and allowed for a more homogeneous air circulation.

Feeding the oven

Some Hoffmann kilns were fuelled by gas, but mostly the fuel was coal.
The ceiling of a ring oven contained many rows of openings - covered
with air-tight metal caps - which were known as "feed holes" (see
drawing and picture below). Experienced "stokers" dropped a small and
precisely dosed amount of crushed coal through the holes above the
chamber that was fired, using a small coal shovel.



They formed a team with the "setters", who built the stacks of unfired
green bricks inside the chambers. These stacks were positioned so that
they contained flues and channels to ensure even baking. Right
underneath each feed hole the bricks were arranged to form "fireplaces",
in which the fuel could be burnt. These were hollow shafts built of
bricks, with occasional projecting bricks to prevent all the fuel from
falling directly to the bottom.

Once the stacks were built, the chamber was closed by a door or a
temporary brick wall, not to be opened again before unloading the bricks
several weeks later. It was not necessary to enter the chambers to light
the fire: once a room was preheated enough by the hot gases of the
chambers next to it, the temperature inside was high enough to
spontaneously combust the coal that was dropped through the feed holes.

How it works

In "[Cement, concrete and
bricks](http://www.archive.org/details/cementconcretebr00searrich)", a
book published in 1914, Alfred B. Searle gives a clear and detailed
description of the exact working of a rectangular Hoffmann kiln on the
basis of a drawing. In spite of its length, his explanation is highly
rewarding so here it is - slightly adapted - in its entirety:


"Assuming that the kiln is in full work, what takes places is as
follows: the fuel is fed into the feed holes covering three chambers (1,
2 and 3). A light charge of fuel is being placed in each hole every
quarter of an hour. Number 1 will be almost finished. The hot gases from
the burning fuel will be carried by the draught through the five
succeeding chambers (4, 5, 6, 7 and 8) and will gradually pre-heat the
bricks without requiring any attention. After this the gases will be of
so low a temperature that they are not longer useful and are taken
through the flue in chamber 8 into the main flue and so to the chimney.
All the dampers to the main flue in chambers 1 to 7 are meanwhile kept
closed, so that all the available heat is used in warming the bricks to
be fired."

"Chambers 9, 10 and 11 contain freshly-set bricks and these must be
separated from the remainder of the kiln. Their temperature must be
raised to at least 120 degrees Celsius (248째F) by a separate supply of
heat; to heat them by waste gases would usually cause them to be badly
scummed, though for some purposes this would not matter and they may
then be taken at once into what is termed "the round of the kiln"
without any preliminary heating. Ordinarily, however, the bricks must be
heated by as pure air as possible, until their temperature is such that
no condensation products can form upon them. The purest warm air
obtainable is that which is drawn through the chambers containing
cooling bricks (14, 15 and 16), and many kilns have specially arranged
flues for the supply of warm air for this purpose \[not shown\]."



"As soon as the bricks have reached a temperature of about 120 degrees
Celsius (248째F) the partition between chamber 8 and chamber 9 is
removed. The damper to the chimney in chamber 8 is closed and the supply
of warm air to number 9 is shut off. The hot gases from the fuel then
pass into chamber 9 and the latter is said to be "taken into the round
of the kiln". Meanwhile, chamber 12 has been filled and chamber 13 is
empty or being emptied."

"Chambers 14, 15 and 16 contain bricks which are cooling, this being
accomplished automatically by the draught of the kiln which draws cool
air through the open doorway of chamber 13. The air thus admitted first
comes into contact with almost cool bricks, and becomes gradually hotter
taking heat from the cooling bricks in its journey until, when it
reaches the burning fuel in chambers 1, 2 and 3, it is of the same
temperature as the hottest bricks in the kiln and ensures, with careful
management, a very complete combustion of the fuel with scarcely any
avoidable waste of heat."

"Any description of the working of a continuous kiln must, necessarily,
appear complicated, but in reality these kilns are quite simple. As soon
as a chamber is filled, its contents are first warmed by hot air, and
then it is taken into the round of the kiln as described. It then needs
no further attention until it has become so hot that a little fuel must
be fed into it in order to complete the burning. As soon as the contents
of this chamber have been heated sufficiently, the addition of coal to
it is stopped, another chamber is taken into the round of the kiln, and
so on; one chamber being emptied and another being filled continuously,
and the fire travelling round and round the kiln in a perfectly regular
and continuous manner."


operation

It is clear that a Hoffmann kiln required a skilful and careful
operation. If the temperature was too high, the bricks would come out
misshapen. If the temperature was too low, the bricks would be weak and
porous. If the bricks were heated up or cooled down too fast, this would
result in cracked, warped or twisted goods. The man in charge of the
kiln ascertained the completion of the burning by means of trials,
shrinkage measurements and [Seger
cones](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pyrometric_cone) (picture on the
right). In a well operated Hoffmann kiln, on average only 3 percent of
bricks were spoiled, but with inferior management this could be 50
percent.Endless tunnel

Apart from mismanagement, another risk was the weather. If a chimney is
used to create draught, a storm will create irregular heating.
Therefore, in some later kilns, large fans were positioned to obtain a
more powerful and perfectly steady draught (also speeding up the
production process). Large temperature differences also were a
challenge.



Although it simplifies the explanation of the Hoffmann system, in
reality most of these continuous kilns did not really consist of 12 to
24 separated chambers. The so-called chambers were basically theoretical
sections of the endless tunnel that indeed could be separated from each
other by very large metal dampers (which could be raised and lowered
from the outside) or - later - sheets of paper or fabric (which were
automatically torn apart at the right moment by the approaching hot
air).


[Ziegelwerk
Notthaft](http://schlot.wordpress.com/2007/08/17/ziegelwerk-notthaft-bn-leobersdorf/)
by [schlot.at](http://www.schlot.at)

But, at any time in the process, a maximum of 3 shutters were in effect
and so a Hoffmann kiln in reality never contained more than 3 chambers -
one being a very large one.The basic function of the shutters was to
prevent the cold air drawn in from going the wrong way around the kiln.

Giant version of the tile stove

Remarkably, the operation of the Hoffmann kiln closely resembles that of
a wood burning [tile
stove]({filename}/posts/tile-stoves.md) - a very
efficient heating appliance used since medieval times to warm the
interior of buildings. In both cases, a complex system of flues and
channels keeps the hot gases inside the oven as long as possible. Only
when their temperature becomes so low that they are of no more use, the
gases are allowed to escape through the chimney.

This makes the burning process very energy-efficient (because almost all
generated heat is put to use) and relatively clean (because of the
complete combustion there is hardly any smoke leaving the chimney).



In a Hoffmann kiln the gases that come out of the chimney have a
temperature below 130 degrees Celsius (266째F), whereas those from
periodic kilns have a temperature of 800 degrees Celsius (1472째F) or
even higher - wasting large amounts of fuel, similar to what happens in
an inefficient wood stove. On average, the fuel consumption of a
Hoffmann kiln is one-third that of a periodic kiln.

Other similarities between tile stoves and Hoffmann kilns are that both
ovens emit heat continuously and only have to be fired from time to time
to keep the process going. And just like an oven stove, a Hoffmann kiln
becomes more energy efficient the larger it is. Therefore, one of the
only drawbacks of Hoffmann kilns was that they required a large plot of
land. Their minimum perimeter was at least 68 metres (224 feet) and some
rectangular ovens were between 100 and 200 metres (328 to 656 feet
long).

There is also one major difference between ring ovens and oven stoves: a
Hoffmann kiln has massive walls (around one metre thick) to provide a
good insulation, in order to prevent the heat from escaping to the
exterior of the building. In an oven stove this is not the case, because
heating the exterior is what it is intended for.



In spite of their energy efficiency, Hofmann kilns were not clean and
pleasant factories. The stokers were covered in black soot and people
living around a kiln were not so happy with it, either. However, these
side-effects have more to do with the era in which Hoffmann kilns were
used than with the technology itself - coal was everywhere and chimneys
were not equipped with scrubbers.

Some ring ovens were fuelled by gas (again, just like some tile stoves),
and in principle they could also be powered by a variety of biomass
fuels, or (clean) electricity. There is no reason why a Hoffmann kiln
today should be dirtier than a modern brick or cement plan.

Hoffmann kilns with multiple fires

The Hoffmann kiln caught on fast - in 1870, a decade after the first one
was built, there were already 639 units operating worldwide. It remained
the most important technology to bake bricks, tiles and ceramic pipes
for a century.



The original design was adapted to many other forms, some of them rather
spectacular. An important improvement to the Hoffmann kiln was made by
Jacob B체hrer from Switzerland. He generated great fuel efficiency and a
large increase in output by the use of a continuous kiln with a tunnel
about twice as long and half as wide as those commonly in use. In order
to overcome the difficulties of construction and loss of heat inherent
to an extremely long and narrow kiln, B체rher arranged his tunnel in a
zigzag manner. Whilst externally his kiln is square in plan, its
effective tunnel length is almost double that of a Hoffmann kiln.


Where very large outputs were required, "shank kilns" were built of a
shape similar to one of the plans shown above. Owing to their special
shape several fires could be kept going in each kiln with a minimum of
labour, and the cost of erection was less than that of several
continuous kilns of equal total capacity. At the beginning of the 20th
century, already over 200 of these shank kilns were in existence on the
continent with an annual output varying from 5 million to 50 million
bricks each.

A continuous kiln was sometimes enlarged by adopting the "Shank"
principle just described: such an alteration to an old circular Hoffmann
is shown on the left. In enlarging a kiln this way it was mostly
necessary to supplement the chimney-draught by the aid of a fan. Some
large continuous kilns were also equipped with several chimneys. Below:
a 40-chamber kiln with two chimneys.



Hoffmann kilns in use today

Today, ring ovens (and some alternatives) are still used in developing
countries (first picture below shows [one in
China](http://www.flickr.com/photos/93173492@N00/3062672763/in/pool-535817@N24/),
second picture below [one in
Mongolia](http://www.flickr.com/photos/93173492@N00/2720160944/in/set-72157602550060984/)),
and by some artisanal producers of traditional bricks in the developed
world - their products being mostly aimed at the renovation of
historical buildings.

In some developing countries a low-tech version of the Hoffmann kiln is
used, in which the arched roof is replaced by a cover of bricks and
sand. These are called [Bull's trench
kilns](http://www.basin.info/gate/bull.htm) - named after its British
inventor W. Bull - and they are common in Pakistan, India, Bangladesh,
[Nepal](http://www.nepal-dia.de/K-Kathmandu-Tal/K-Ziegelei_Kathmandu/k-ziegelei_kathmandu.html)
(some great pictures here) and Myanmar.

These semi-continuous kilns - 100 to 150 metres long and usually built
in a trench - produce bricks of similar strength, but with a lesser
esthetic quality. In a Bull's trench kiln the light sheet metal chimneys
are moved around every 24 hours by a team of workers in order to fire a
different part of the tunnel.



"[Brickworks](http://www.flickr.com/photos/93173492@N00/sets/72157602550060984/)"
by [tarboat](http://www.flickr.com/photos/93173492@N00/)

These kilns are less efficient than a real Hoffmann kiln, but still more
efficient than periodic kilns. Their great advantage is that they are
cheaper to built. In a real Hoffmann kiln it is necessary to burn some
six to ten million bricks before the saving in fuel has compensated the
cost of the construction of the oven.

During the second half of the twentieth century, most Hoffmann kilns in
the developed world were replaced by continuous tunnel kilns (which were
already patented in 1877 by another German, Otto Bock). In a tunnel
kiln, the process of the Hoffmann kiln is turned upside down.

Modern brick production: the tunnel oven

In a Hofmann kiln the bricks stay where they are and the fire moves
around, but in a tunnel kiln the fire remains stationary while the
bricks move slowly through the tunnel. The fire is situated in the
centre and the bricks slowly proceed through the tunnel on a train or a
conveyor belt, so that bricks which are in the beginning of the tunnel
are slowly being preheated by the fire further on, and bricks which have
passed the fire are allowed to cool down gradually.



"[Brickworks](http://www.flickr.com/photos/93173492@N00/sets/72157602550060984/)"
by [tarboat](http://www.flickr.com/photos/93173492@N00/)

Tunnel kilns are much more expensive to build than Hofmann kilns, but
they save on labour costs because they can be highly automated - today
they operate without a human in sight. Still, in spite of all that
high-tech, they are not more energy-efficient than Hoffmann kilns - both
processes require around 2,000 kilojoules per kilogram of brick.

If compared to some improved versions of Hoffmann kilns, a tunnel kiln
is even less efficient. Moreover, in modern brick production facilities
all too often energy efficiency is sacrificed for speed and the drying
and cooling processes are fastened by means of extra energy inputs (see
the [specifications of a modern tunnel
kiln](http://www.blockmachines.biz/tunnelkiln.htm)).

The reason for the existence of a tunnel kiln is that the production
process is further accelerated, resulting in a much larger output of
bricks. This might as well be the most devastating aspect of modern
brick production, because there seems to be a correlation between the
speed of production and the ease with which we demolish buildings.

짤 Kris De Decker (edited by Vincent Grosjean)



Sources (in order of importance):

-   "[Cement, concrete and
    bricks](http://www.archive.org/details/cementconcretebr00searrich)",
    Alfred B. Searle, 1914.
-   "[Modern
    brickmaking](http://www.archive.org/details/modernbrickmakin00searrich)",
    Alfred B. Searle, 1911. Chapter 8 (p.243-367) has additional
    information on Hoffmann kilns.
-   "[Le grand
    four](http://www.arts-et-metiers.net/musee.php?P=46&id=7&lang=fra&flash=f&arc=1)",
    [Mus챕e des arts et m챕tiers](http://www.arts-et-metiers.net/).
-   "[Notes on building
    construction](http://www.archive.org/details/notesonbuilding01britgoog)",
    Henry Fidler, 1889.
-   "[Dictionary of arts, manufactures, and mines containing a clear
    exposition of their principles and
    practice](http://www.archive.org/details/dictionaryofarts03ureauoft)",
    Vol.III, 1875.
-   "[Hoffmann kilns](http://www.basin.info/gate/HoffmannKilns.htm)",
    German Appropriate Technology Exchange (GATE).
-   "[Hoffmannscher
    Ringofen](http://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hoffmannscher_Ringofen)",
    German Wikipedia. Note: the description of a Hoffmann kiln on the
    English Wikipedia is wrong. It is confused with a tunnel kiln.
-   "[Hoffmann kiln, Craven Lime
    Works](http://www.outofoblivion.org.uk/record.asp?id=296)", Out of
    Oblivion.
-   "[Architectural pottery: bricks, tiles, pipes, enamelled
    terra-cottas, ordinary and incrusted quarries, stoneware mosaics,
    fa챦ences, and architectural
    stoneware](http://www.archive.org/details/architecturalpot00lefrich)",
    Leon Lef챗vre, K.H. Bird and W. Moore Binns, 1900.
-   "[Brickworks](http://www.flickr.com/photos/93173492@N00/sets/72157602550060984/)"
    by [tarboat](http://www.flickr.com/photos/93173492@N00/) (pictures).
    Also check out the [bricks
    collection](http://www.flickr.com/photos/93173492@N00/sets/72157594555467766/)
    and the [other industrial
    sets](http://www.flickr.com/photos/93173492@N00/collections/72157600328338934/).
-   "[Ring-Ofen](http://www.flickr.com/photos/countzero/2197890150)" by
    [Karls Enkel](http://www.flickr.com/photos/countzero/) (picture).
-   "[Ziegeleipark
    Mildenberg](http://www.flickr.com/photos/matthias17/sets/72157607107935936/)"
    by [Matthias 17](http://www.flickr.com/photos/matthias17/)
    (pictures).
-   [Briqueterie
    DeWulf](http://www.briqueterie-d-allonne.fr/four%20Hoffman/four%20hoffmanfla.html)
    & [Schlot.at](http://schlot.wordpress.com/) (pictures).

Related articles:



-   [Burning the bones of the
    earth]({filename}/posts/lime-kilns.md): lime
    kilns
-   [Tiles as a substitute for
    steel]({filename}/posts/tiles-vaults.md):
    timbrel vaulting
-   [Fruit walls: urban solar farming in the
    1600s]({filename}/posts/fruit-walls-urban-farming.md)
-   [Sunbathing in the living
    room]({filename}/posts/tile-stoves.md): tile
    stoves and heat walls
-   [Medieval
    smokestacks]({filename}/posts/peat-and-coal-fossil-fuels-in-pre-industrial-times.md):
    fossil fuels in pre-industrial times
-   [The bright future of solar powered
    factories]({filename}/posts/solar-powered-factories.md):
    we need a renewable source of heat energy
-   [Wind powered
    factories]({filename}/posts/history-of-industrial-windmills.md):
    history (and future?) of industrial windmills
-   [The solar
    envelope]({filename}/posts/solar-oriented-cities-1-the-solar-envelope.md):
    how to heat and cool cities without fossil fuels

[Main page](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/).

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Climbing kilns in China

A small scale alternative to a Hoffmann kiln is the [Vertical Shaft
Brick kiln](http://www.basin.info/gate/vertical.htm) (picture below). It
appeared in the 1960s in China and it is said to be two to three times
as efficient as a Hoffmann kiln.


it is cheap to build, does not require a large area of land and is also
suited to produce much smaller amounts of brick. A Hoffmann kiln has to
be large enough in order to be efficient and is not suited for an output
of less than 15,000 bricks per day (around 5 million bricks per year).

In a vertical shaft brick kiln, the fire zone is in the middle of the
shaft. Bricks are loaded from the top (the picture does not show the
ramp at the back), and unloaded from the bottom. In essence, the kiln is
built *inside* a chimney. Its working is explained
[here](http://www.basin.info/gate/vertical.htm). Around 50,000 of them
have been constructed in China.

Although research on this type of kilns is still scarce, it would not be
a surprise if it turns out that the Chinese have found the most
ecological means to fire bricks. It was described above that prior to
the Hoffmann oven all kilns were periodic ovens, but this is not
entirely correct.


early Chinese potters already built their kilns [as a series of chambers
in the side of a hill](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anagama_kiln)
(picture on the right) in the 5th century. The lowest chamber was fired
first and the heat of combustion ascended through the chambers higher up
the hillside, pre-heating the ceramics. When a kiln chamber had been
fired, it was cooled down by air drawn through it from below. These
Chinese climbing kilns - also fuelled through holes in the roof - were
the forerunners of the Hoffmann kiln.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Bull's trench kiln in Nepal:





More pictures
[here](http://www.nepal-dia.de/K-Kathmandu-Tal/K-Ziegelei_Kathmandu/k-ziegelei_kathmandu.html).

