Title: Bring back the horses
Date: 2008-04-18
Author: Kris De Decker
Category: Low-tech Solutions
Tags: agriculture, animal power, draft horses, farming, horses, horses in agriculture, tractors
Slug: horses-agricult
Summary: Replacing tractors with real horse power could be the revolution that
agriculture needs.
Status: published

![image](/images/horse.jpg)
Replacing tractors with real horse power could be the revolution that
agriculture needs.

Horses and other draft and pack animals revolutionized transportation,
war, hunting, manufacturing and agriculture. Work horses formed the
backbone of industrial society until the first decennia of the 20th
century, mining coal, ploughing fields and transporting goods and people
in fast growing cities.

Reintroducing horses in city traffic would be a bad idea - cars might be
noisy, dangerous and polluting, but mounts are even worse. In
agriculture, however, animal power would bring surprisingly large
environmental profits.

> Replacing tractors with horses does not mean going back to the middle
> ages, nor does it exclude heavy machinery, high yields or high-tech

For several thousands of years, horses, donkeys, mules, oxen, camels,
buffaloes, llamas and elephants were the only means of transportation,
next to walking. Animals pulled carts and sledges loaded with goods or
people, and trains of pack animals crossed hundreds of kilometres of
mountain ranges, jungles and deserts.

The arrival of railways and steam machines in the 19th century raised
the need for animal transport over short and medium distances
substantially. Railways, steamships and factories generated a lot of
extra freight traffic.

Work horses were responsible for the shunting of steam trains and for
the hauling of coal to stations and factories. In the mines coal was
transported by thousands of horses who never saw daylight. The rapidly
growing human population in cities was [transported by horse cabs,
omnibuses and
trams](http://findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_qa3884/is_200509/ai_n15613227).

![image](/images/horse-tramway.jpg)

In 1890, there were an estimated 300,000 horses in London, which at that
time had a human population of around 4.5 million (or 1 horse for every
15 people). In 1880, New York had between 150,000 and 175,000 horses,
while the total amount of horses in American cities in 1900 was
estimated at 3 to 5 million.

Not all of these horses were on the streets at the same time, since the
animals worked in shifts. Still, at the end of the nineteenth century,
the horse population in cities like London and New York became so large
that health problems emerged.

## Dung in the City

In 1880, the 12,500 horses in a small city like Milwaukee (then 350,000
people) produced 133 tonnes of manure each day – more than 10 kilograms
per horse per day. That means that the horse population in London must
have produced around 3,000 tonnes of dung per day, of which a
substantial amount landed on the paving-stones. On dry days, the muck
became dust that stuck to people’s faces and clothes. On rainy days,
streets were transformed in open sewers.

![image](/images/horse-traffic.jpg)

Apart from pollution, thousands of iron horseshoes and wheels must have
made a terrible racket, and traffic accidents were no less frequent than
they are today. Moreover, being a horse in the city at the end of the
19th century was not an enviable fate. Pulling carriages crammed with
people or goods (sometimes with weights of over ten tons) on dirty and
slippery cobble-stones was so exhausting that most animals dropped dead
after just a few years of work.

> Tractors don't reproduce, and they don't fertilize the soil

While using pack and draft animals for long distance travel might not be
such a bad idea (at least it’s good to know that the end of oil does not
necessarily mean the end of international trade), reintroducing horses
or other animals in city traffic would be plain crazy. However, the
principal reason why horse power is unsuited for city traffic - dung -
turns out to be a very interesting quality when it comes to agriculture.

## Horses in Agriculture

Replacing tractors with horses would be a good move since horse manure is a
perfect [fertilizer for agricultural
soil]({filename}/posts/recycling-animal-and-human-dung-is-the-key-to-sustainable-farming.md).
Since tractors don’t produce excrements, fertilizers have to come from
somewhere else. That can be manure from animals which are being raised
for their meat, or (mostly) artificial fertilizers. In both cases, it
takes additional fossil fuels to fertilize the soil – for transporting
animal manure to the fields, or for manufacturing fossil fuel based
fertilizers (and transporting them too).

![image](/images/tractor.jpg)

Horses have more advantages over tractors. They reproduce themselves,
while tractors don’t. That means more oil saved, and other resources
like water and metals, because if you switch to horses you don’t have to
manufacture tractors. And while tractors need fossil fuels to operate,
horses don’t. Large tractors have engines of up to 500 horsepower, which
makes them consume up to twice as much fuel as a large SUV.

Switching (back) from tractors to horses would make agriculture almost
completely independent of oil and minerals – and that could make quite a
difference in a world that is (according to many) running out of fossil
fuels and minerals. Horses could mean food security, without any need
for importing anything. Moreover, horses don’t emit greenhouse gases
worth mentioning (contrary to ruminants like cows) and they don’t
pollute the air. Horses might be the solution that [agriculture
needs](http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/europe/7348728.stm).

## Fodder or Diesel

Of course, horses need energy too. No fossil energy, but food. This
means that replacing tractors with horses would raise the need for
additional agricultural land to grow feed for the animals (land that in
turn has to be cultivated by extra horses). 

Tractors could derive their
fuel from agricultural land, too, if we turn food crops into bio-diesel
or ethanol. Therefore, to know whether it is a useful strategy to
replace tractors by horses, we have to know how many extra acres would
be needed to feed the horses, and how many acres would be needed to
“feed” the tractors.

> "Powering agriculture with tractors requires almost 2.5 times as much (bio)energy than powering agriculture with horses"

This
[calculation](http://www.landinstitute.org/vnews/display.v/ART/2000/12/15/3a3a508a9)
was done in [a
study](http://www.landinstitute.org/vnews/display.v/ART/2000/12/15/3df6412ab088c)
published in the ‘American Journal of Alternative Agriculture’, eight
years ago. With oil prices almost 4 times lower than today, the
researchers might as well have been talking to a brick wall.

Today, however, amidst alarming reports on peak oil and food shortages,
their findings sound very appealing. Based on the amount of horses
relative to crop area in Northern America in 1920 (when only 3.6 percent
of farms had a tractor), as well as the amount of horses operated in
1997 on Amish farms, the researchers calculated that America would now
need 23 million horses to cultivate the present 147 million hectares of
farmland.

## Tractor versus horse

Taking into account the annual feeds for work horses (1,300 kg of corn
grain, 1,600 kg of alfalfa and 500 kg of harvested roughage) and the
national yields for these crops during the past decade, they conclude
that the 23 million horses would require 9 million hectare of
agricultural land for food, or 6 percent of US cropland. To "feed" the
tractors with crops, 7.4 million hectares of agricultural land is
needed, or 5 percent of cropland, which makes tractors slightly more
efficient than horses.

![image](/images/horse-in-agriculture.jpg)

To make a fair comparison, however, it should also be taken into account
that horses make their own fertilizer without any extra energy input and
that they reproduce themselves, while tractors need artificial
fertilizers and have to be manufactured (and replaced). The researchers
express these energy needs in terms of cropland requirements, to be able
to compare them with the other results (they take the view that the
fertilizers and tractors are produced with energy delivered by energy
crops). They also included the energy needed to turn crops into fodder.

The cropland needed to feed the horses then rises to 16 million hectare
or 11 percent of US cropland (because of the energy needed to produce
fodder from crops), while the cropland needed to “feed” and manufacture
the tractors rises to 38 million hectares or 26 percent of American
cropland. Conclusion: when everything is taken into account, powering
agriculture with tractors requires almost 2.5 times more energy than
powering agriculture with horses.

![image](/images/tractor-vs-horse.jpg)

A [Swedish
study](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science?_ob=ArticleURL&_udi=B6VFB-45G03BY-1&_user=10&_rdoc=1&_fmt=&_orig=search&_sort=d&view=c&_acct=C000050221&_version=1&_urlVersion=0&_userid=10&md5=83f4a9fd3efde34433c305c08f6e82eb)
published in 2002 came to similar results: it concluded that a
tractor-based agriculture consumes 67 percent more energy than a
horse-based agriculture. The Swedish also
[calculated](http://www.haworthpress.com/store/ArticleAbstract.asp?ID=6743)
that the energy input in (local) agriculture increased 13-fold from 1927
to 1981, while total agricultural production in 1981 was only 2.4 times
that in 1927. Find a link to the full pdf of the Swedish studies
[here](http://www.elements.nb.ca/extra/horsetractor.pdf).

## High-tech Horses

Replacing tractors with horses is not without challenges, though. First
of all, there are not enough horses or other draft animals around.
Currently, there are some [9 million
horses](http://www.horsecouncil.org/economics.html) in the United
States. If we want to reintroduce horses somewhere in the near future –
say, when the oil runs out or becomes prohibitively expensive – we
better start breeding.

Secondly, only a small share of those animals are work or draft horses,
one ton muscular beasts with massive hindquarters, who are best suited
for pulling weights. If normal riding horses would be used, many more
animals are needed. Even if in theory any weight can be pulled by adding
more and more light horses, in practice horse spans that are too large
become unmanageable.

> "Encouraging people to watch a horse's ass instead of a computer screen might prove difficult"

Horses are not as low-tech and natural as they seem to be. Heavy work horses
like the Percheron *(picture left)*, the Belgian, the Shire or the
Clydesdale are the result of centuries of cross-breeding by man.
Unfortunately, these breeds are not doing so well.

The situation is not as alarming as it was fifty years ago, when many
breeds of work horses were on the brink of extinction. Their numbers
have risen again, but the population is still small enough to make them
vulnerable to genetic deviations.

![image](/images/percheron.jpg)

Furthermore, most of them are now bred for their looks only, and these
characteristics do not always correspond with agricultural needs or even
a good health. If draft horses become extinct, it would take many
centuries to get them back on the scene (horse 'technology' deteriorated
before, after the decline of the ancient empires).

## Man Power

Even if we can breed enough work horses, agriculture would have to
change. The advantages of a tractor are speed and convenience. It is
easier to steer a tractor than a span of horses, and it goes a lot
faster. There is not so much difference in velocity, but because of
their larger power, tractors can pull wider and heavier ploughs, so that
they don’t have to go up and down the field as many times as a horse
span. Using several horse spans at the same time makes up for that, but
that also means that you need more farmers.

Horses also need to be taken care of, seven days a week, even when they
are not working. And they might drop fertilizer on the field, but they
are not evenly distributing it. All of this means that a horse-based
agriculture would demand a lot more man power. More people would have to
work in agriculture – while today, in industrialized countries, almost
nobody works on the field anymore. Encouraging people to watch a horse's
ass instead of a computer screen might prove difficult.

![image](/images/forty-horses.jpg)

On the other hand, putting tractors in the stable does not mean going
back to the middle ages, and it does not exclude heavy machinery, high
yields or high-tech. Horses in agriculture are a fairly modern
phenomenon. In antiquity and throughout the middle ages, fields were
ploughed by oxen. In Europe and in North America horses took over in the
19th century with the introduction of a new generation of machinery that
was too heavy for oxen. These machines required much more animal power,
but they increased yields and decreased the need for man power
substantially. Without tractors.

## Lightweight Machinery

In the US in the second half of the 19th century, you could see 12-meter
wide and 15-ton heavy harvesting machines pulled by spans of [up to 40
horses](http://www.imh.org/museum/drafthorse.php?pageid=11), managed by
just 5 or 6 farmers (*see picture* *above*). These were mostly riding
horses, since most European draft horses were only imported at the end
of the 19th century (these purebred animals were usually not working in
the field, but only used to "upgrade" the existing horse population).
Today, agricultural machinery is trimmed to powerful tractors. With 21st
century technology, it must be possible to design extremely lightweight
machinery that can combine horse power with high yields, high speeds and
easy management.

© Kris De Decker (edited by Vincent Grosjean)

Updates :

1\. Find a link to the full pdf of the Swedish studies
[here](http://www.elements.nb.ca/extra/horsetractor.pdf).

2\. Excellent article on the [history of
horsecars](http://www.americanheritage.com/articles/magazine/it/1992/1/1992_1_40.shtml).
