Title: How to Get Your Apartment Off the Grid
Date: 2016-05-17 14:27
Author: Kris De Decker
Category: Low-tech Solutions
Tags: off-grid, off-grid solar, off-the-grid, off-the-grid solar, solar PV apartment
Slug: how-to-go-off-grid-in-your-apartment
Status: published



The typical solar PV power installation requires access to a private
roof and a big budget. However, wouldn't it be possible to get around
these obstacles by installing small solar panels on window sills and
balconies, connected to a low-voltage direct current (DC) distribution
network? To put this theory to the test, I decided to power Low-tech
Magazine's home office in Spain with solar energy, and write my articles
off the grid.

Picture: Low-tech Magazine's solar powered office.

Solar panels have become cheaper and more efficient in recent years, but
they are far from a universal solution, even in sunny regions. One
reason is that a typical solar photovoltaic (PV) installation is still
beyond the budget of many people. The average pricing for a 5kW
residential PV system completed in 2014 varied from \$11,000 in Germany
to \$16,450 in the USA. \[1, 2\] Roughly half of that amount concerns
the installation costs. \[3\]

A second obstacle for solar power is that not everybody lives in a
single-family dwelling with access to a private roof. Those who reside
in apartment buildings have little chance of harvesting solar power with
a conventional roof-mounted system. Furthermore, in apartment buildings,
the roof would quickly become too crowded to cover the electricity use
of all residents, a problem that grows larger the more floors there are
in a building. Lastly, a typical solar installation is problematic when
you're renting a place, whether it's a house or an apartment.

I'm one of those people who runs into every one of these obstacles: I
live in a flat, I rent the place, and I don't have the budget for a
conventional solar system. However, I receive a lot of sunshine. My
apartment is located near Barcelona in Spain, a city with an average
solar insolation of almost 1,700 kWh/m2/year (which is also the average
figure across the USA). Furthermore, the 60 m2 apartment has the balcony
and all windows facing south-south-west, and there is no shading by
trees or other buildings.



The view from my home office.

These conditions allow me to get through the winter without a heating
system, relying only on [solar
heat]({filename}/posts/solar-oriented-cities-1-the-solar-envelope.md)
and [thermal
underclothing]({filename}/posts/body-insulation-thermal-underwear.md).
Hot water is supplied by a solar boiler, which was installed by the
landlord. Clothes are dried on the balcony. While tinkering with solar
panels for an art project, I got an idea: with the sun already powering
so much of my living space, wouldn't it also be possible to harvest
solar power from the window sills and the balcony and take my apartment
off the electricity grid? Such a PV installation would solve my
problems:

-   I don't need access to the roof.
-   I can install the system myself, which makes it much cheaper.
-   I can take the solar installation with me if I move to another
    place.

Obviously, the big question is whether or not such an unconventional
solar system could generate the necessary electricity. As a first
experiment, I decided to power my 10 m2 home office with solar panels
placed on the 2.8 m long window ledge that runs along the windows of the
office and the adjacent bedroom.

Solar Powered Home Office
-------------------------

The window in my office is quite small (at 1.5 m2, it takes up only half
of one wall). However, there's no need for power in the bedroom, which
has been lighted by three [IKEA SUNNAN
lamps](http://www.ikea.com/ms/en_GB/sunnan/sunnan.html) for years.
Consequently, the full window ledge is available to power the home
office. It offers enough space for five solar panels of 10W each,
providing me with 50 watt-peak of solar power. The balcony will serve to
power the rest of the apartment, and the plans for that second project
are outlined at the end of this article.



With their placement on the window sill, the panels are shaded by the
building itself in the morning. They receive direct sunlight from about
10 am to 5 pm in the pit of winter (a total of 7 hours), and from
roughly 1 pm to 9 pm in the height of summer (a total of 8 hours). The
maximum energy production is thus roughly 400 Wh per day.

The solar panels are connected in parallel and coupled to a solar charge
controller and 550 Wh of lead-acid batteries. Assuming a 33%
Depth-Of-Discharge (DoD) and a round-trip battery efficiency of 80%,
this gives me a maximum energy storage of roughly 150 Wh.

> Can you power a home office with 50 watt-peak solar panels and 150 Wh
> of energy storage?

Now let's look at the energy use of my home office, before it was solar
powered. I sit here working most of the days, either researching,
writing, or building and repairing stuff. Devices that regularly use
electricity are:

-   A laptop, which requires an average 20 watts of power.
-   An external computer screen, which needs 16.5W of power.
-   Two CFL lamps (20W & 12W) and one LED-lamp (3W).

Home Office Power Use
---------------------

This adds up to 35W of power during the day (with only the laptop and
the screen in use) and 70W after sunset (the laptop, the screen, and the
lights). I usually work in the mornings and evenings, roughly from 10 am
to 2 pm and from 8 pm to 1 am. During the afternoon, I do other stuff or
I work in the library.

Total electricity use in my office is thus (on average) 500 Wh per day,
with little variation between winter and summer. On cloudy days I also
use lights in morning, which can raise energy use to 640 Wh per day.
Then there are some devices that occasionaly need power:

-   A laser printer, which uses 4Wh of energy for warming up and
    printing eight text pages. This corresponds to operating my desk
    lamp (5W) for more than 45 minutes.
-   A pair of PC loudspeakers (1.5W of power).
-   Three USB bicycle lights (each use 1.4W of power while charging).
-   A digital camera, which uses 3W while charging.
-   A fan, which uses 30-40 watts of power.
-   A mobile phone (a dumb one) that's charged once every few weeks.



Obviously, my solar PV system doesn't produce enough energy to power my
home office. While regular electricity use is at least 500 Wh on a
9-hour working day, the window sills give me a maximum of 400 Wh per
day. On overcast days, energy production can be as low as 40 to 200 Wh
per day, depending on the type of cloud cover. Furthermore, energy
storage is only 150 Wh under ideal circumstances, while most energy use
(350 Wh) is after sunset.

And yet, here I am, typing this article on a solar powered laptop in a
room that's lit by solar power. How is this possible? By following these
strategies:

1.  Maximize solar power production by tilting the panels according to
    the season.
2.  Minimize power use by installing a low-voltage DC grid and using DC
    appliances.
3.  Force yourself to lower energy demand on dark days by going off the
    grid.

Below, we look at these points in more detail. My solar system has been
in operation since November 2015, initially with only two 10W panels.
Three more panels were added in early spring.

1. Adjust the Tilt of the Solar Panels
--------------------------------------

Roof-mounted solar panels usually have a fixed angle in relation to the
sun. Because the elevation of the sun varies throughout the year, a
fixed angle is always a compromise. Panels that lay horizontal on a flat
roof are relatively well positioned for energy production in summer, but
much less so for use in winter. On the other hand, tilted solar panels
perform much better in winter but not as well as in summer. On sloped
roofs, the angle of the panels is often determined by the angle of the
roof, which isn't necessarily the best angle for solar power production.

> A PV panel that's optimally tilted towards the winter sun can triple
> electricity generation compared to a horizontally placed panel

Adjusting the angle of a solar panel according to the season can
increase electricity production significantly in winter. In December, a
PV panel in Barcelona that's optimally tilted towards the winter sun can
triple electricity generation compared to a horizontally placed panel.
Because the advantage is much smaller in other seasons, the average
annual increase in power production is less than 10%. However, tilting
the panels is the key to harvesting enough solar power during the winter
months, when power shortages are most probable.





In the case of a balcony or window sill solar PV system, adjusting the
angle of the solar panels is as simple as watering the plants. Although
you could make small adjustments every hour, day or month, adapting the
angle two or four times per year is as far as you should go.

There's another advantage to having the solar panels so close at hand:
they can be cleaned regularly. Roof-mounted solar panels rarely get
cleaned because the roof usually isn't very accessible. Losses due to
dust and dirt are assumed to be 1% of generated energy, but in dry and
dusty regions, as well as in traffic-heavy areas, they can be as high as
4-6% if washing is not undertaken on a regular basis. \[4\]

> Adjusting the angle of a window sill solar panel is as simple as
> watering the plants

Obviously, it's crucial that the panels don't fall off the window ledge,
no matter what happens. Window sills differ in shapes and sizes, which
calls for a custom-made supporting structure. I have a fixed metal bar
at my window sill, aimed at protecting plant containers, which allows me
to securely lock the solar panels in place. I guess I'm lucky to have
this, but it also shows how small design changes can make a big
difference. As an additional safety measure, I loaded the wooden base of
each panel with some heavy rocks.

Adding a mechanism to vary the tilt of the panels complicates the
design, because the moving part has to be just as sturdy as the base.
Following some failed attempts, I found a mechanism that seems to work,
using vintage Meccano rods (2-3 layers thick and with larger nuts and
bolts). One rod is connected to the base of the structure, while another
is connected to the wooden board that carries the panel. Both rods are
connected to each other in the middle. Loosening this connection allows
me to adjust the length of the supports and thus the angle of the solar
panels.

Solar PV Windows?
-----------------

Some readers might consider my approach soon-to-be-obsolete, because
several companies are working on "solar PV windows": glass that doubles
as an electricity generator. However, this technology would not perform
as well as adjustable solar panels on window sills, for several reasons.



The panels on the left are optimally tilted for spring, the two panels
on the right are still in winter position.

First of all, solar PV windows are most often entirely vertical, which
is never an efficient angle to generate solar power&mdash;their power
generation is about 3 times lower than horizontal panels. \[5\]
Secondly, in summer it would be impossible to open the windows or lower
the shutters, which would quickly overheat my office and introduce a
need for air-conditioning.

My solar PV installation, on the other hand, can produce power when the
shutters are closed and when the windows are open. Last but not least, a
window-integrated solar panel can't be taken with you when you move,
while my system is entirely mobile.

2. Opt for a Low-Voltage DC System
----------------------------------

Typical solar PV systems convert the direct current (DC) electricity
produced by solar panels into alternating current (AC) in order to make
it compatible with the AC distribution system in a building. Because
many modern appliances operate internally on DC, the AC electricity is
then converted back to DC. The DC/AC-conversion is done by an inverter,
which sits between the solar charge controller and the load. The second
conversion happens in the (external or internal) AC/DC adapter of the
devices that are being used.

The trouble with this double energy conversion is that it generates
substantial energy losses. This is especially true in the case of
solid-state devices such as LEDs and computers, where the combined
losses of the DC/AC/DC conversion amount to roughly 30%&mdash;[see our
previous
article]({filename}/posts/slow-electricity-the-return-of-low-voltage-dc-power.md)
for further detail. Because these are also the devices that make up most
of the load in my home office, it makes a lot of sense to avoid these
losses by building a low-voltage DC system instead.



Like in a boat or a camper, the 12V DC electricity of my solar panels is
used directly by 12V DC appliances, or stored in 12V DC batteries. If my
solar panels generate their maximum output of 50W, my devices have 50W
available. When battery power is involved, charging and discharging the
battery adds 20% of energy loss, which leaves 40W available for the
appliances.

> The choice for a low voltage DC system raises energy efficiency by 40%

On the other hand, in a typical solar PV installation where a DC/AC/DC
energy conversion takes place, the devices would only have 35W
available, and the rest would be lost as heat during energy conversion.
If lead-acid battery storage is used in such a system, only 28W of power
remains. In short, in my specific case, choosing a DC system multiplies
power production by 1.4 times.

The choice for a DC system saves not only energy but also space and
costs. Less solar panels are needed and there's no need to buy a DC/AC
inverter, which is a costly device that needs to be replaced at least
once during the life of a solar system. Most importantly, you can build
a DC solar power system yourself, even if you're as clumsy as I am. A
low-voltage DC grid (up to 24V) is safe to handle because it carries no
risk of electric shock. \[6\] Adding up all costs, I took my home office
off the grid for less than 400 euro.

Where to Find DC Appliances
---------------------------

Mounting a DC system implies the use of DC-compatible devices. However,
because so many modern appliances operate internally on DC, this doesn't
mean that you have to buy everything anew. To adapt the lighting in my
office, I simply cut the mains plugs from the power cords, replaced them
with DC-compatible plugs that fit straight into my solar charge
controller, and substituted the light bulbs with 12V LED-bulbs. To run
the laptop on DC, I replaced the power adapter by a DC-compatible power
cord, which is available for use in cars. These power cords can be
bought for every laptop model you can imagine.



My 3W DC lamp.



My laptop with DC power cord.

Other devices are harder to adapt because the AC/DC adapter is located
in the device itself. For example, I haven't figured out yet how to
convert my external computer screen to operate directly on DC power.

Appliances that cannot be converted are usually available in a 12V [DC
version](http://www.12volt-travel.com/). Examples are refrigerators,
slow cookers, televisions, air compressors, or power tools. These can be
more expensive than their AC counterparts, because they are produced in
much smaller quantities. [DC
refrigerators](http://www.geinnovations.net/solarrefrigerator.html) are
very expensive because they use vacuum insulation. While this makes
sense in a camper or sailboat where space is restricted, it's a needless
cost in a common building.

The cigarette lighter receptacle in cars, initially designed to power an
electrically heated cigarette lighter, has been the *de facto* standard
DC connector for decades. More recently, it has been joined by another
low voltage DC distribution system, the USB connector. USB cables
operate on 5V DC and can transfer both data and energy. Many consumer
electronics are now powered by them.

Currently, these devices are charged by the USB-port of a laptop or
desktop computer, but they could be plugged straight into a solar PV
system. While the standard USB-cable carries a maximum power of only 10
watts, the newer USB-PD standard accommodates devices with a power
consumption of up to 100 watts.

Overcast Days
-------------

The choice for a DC system has lowered power consumption in my home
office considerably. My laptop's energy use has decreased by about 20%.
Switching to DC-direct LED-lamps has halved power use for lighting from
35 to 16W. Based on the 9-hour working day described earlier, daily
energy use of regularly used devices in my home office has come down
from 500 to 350 Wh/day. This brings average energy use below energy
production on sunny days (400 Wh), which are plentiful where I live.



Three 10W solar panels on the window sill of the bedroom.

In reality, the external computer screen and the laser printer are still
running on grid power. The 350 Wh of energy use mentioned above includes
the hypothetical use of a DC external screen (saving 15% of power
compared to the AC version), but not the energy use of the printer.
However, on sunny days, I have a significant surplus of electricity,
which suggests that I could also operate the external screen and the
printer. Even on partly cloudy days energy is abundant.

However, energy use remains too high during overcast days, when power
production is between 40 and 200 Wh per day. Obviously, adding more
solar panels and batteries would solve the issue, but that's not the way
to go because the solar PV system would become more expensive, less
practical, and less sustainable.

> On sunny or partly cloudy days, I have more than enough electricity.
> On overcast days, I have to reduce energy demand.

To guarantee a daily 350 Wh of electricity during three consecutive
heavy overcast days in December (a worst case scenario of only 40 Wh
energy production per day), I would need to increase solar power
capacity fourfold, from 50 to 200W peak capacity, and provide at least
five times more batteries.

Although it would be possible to install 200W on the window sills, in
that case the solar panels would stop solar light and heat from entering
the rooms, which would be counterproductive. Furthermore, I would
produce way too much electricity for most of the year.

3. Adjust Energy Demand to Meet Available Supply
------------------------------------------------



The solar charge controller and half of the home office battery storage.

There's another option to make the numbers match if there's not enough
sun available, and that's using less energy. Suggesting a reduction in
energy use is rather controversial, but there are a surprisingly large
number of ways to reduce energy use, without having to revert to a
typewriter and candles. Here are some possibilities for my home office:

-   I could install a second working desk right next to the window. This
    eliminates the need for artificial lighting on dark winter days,
    which saves me at least another 40 Wh on days that electricity
    production is at its lowest.

<!-- -->

-   I could use less lights in evening during low solar power days. For
    most of the year, I have sufficient energy available to use all the
    lights in the room. However, most of the days I get by with only two
    lamps, and if necessary I could use a single 5W or even 3W lamp.
    When solar production is at its lowest, the latter still gives me
    more than 13 hours of light. I will never have to spend a night in
    the dark.

<!-- -->

-   I could shift loads towards sunny afternoons. Even in winter, the
    batteries can already be fully charged by around 2 or 3 pm on sunny
    days. Adding extra load to the system during these periods takes
    advantage of solar energy that would otherwise get wasted. This is
    when I can charge the bicycle lights, the digital camera or the
    phone, or when I can use the 12V soldering iron (my only power tool)
    or the printer. In summer I can use the surplus of energy to power
    two small USB-fans, and of course that's the time when I need the
    fans the most.

> There are a surprisingly large number of ways to reduce energy use,
> without having to revert to a typewriter and candles

-   I could change my working schedule. If I could manage to work from 9
    am to 6 pm instead of in morning and evening, I obtain a double
    energy savings. I would need no more lighting, except for one hour
    or so in winter (which saves 70 to 80 Wh/day). Secondly, I would use
    more electricity while it's being generated, avoiding 20% battery
    charging and discharging losses while operating the laptop at night
    and in mornings (which saves another 30Wh). Changing my working
    schedule would lower daily electricity use to roughly 125Wh, less
    than half of maximum power production. Furthermore, all battery
    capacity would be available for overcast days, because there is no
    energy use at night.

<!-- -->

-   I could adapt computer work to solar conditions. There's a
    remarkable difference in power use for the laptop between writing
    (roughly 15W) and surfing the web (roughly 25W). In other words, I
    can work almost twice as long when I'm writing, which I could do
    whenever available energy is low.

<!-- -->

-   I could ditch my external computer screen. It can be very handy for
    some work, giving both a screen to read and a screen to write, but
    most of the time it's just wasting energy without being very useful.
    Ditching the external screen would save me another 150 Wh per day.
    However, it would probably increase the use of the printer, so it
    remains to be seen if this option really saves energy.

<!-- -->

-   During consecutive, heavy overcast days, I could revert to more
    drastic measures, like working in the library or not working at all.
    Or, I could do work that doesn't involve any energy use during the
    day, such as reading books and taking notes by hand. This would
    bring extra advantages; it can be refreshing to disconnect and
    concentrate on something in the old-fashioned way. Going out one
    evening is a fun and easy way to keep the power level high enough
    during periods of bad weather.

<!-- -->

-   I could build a [pedal powered
    generator](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/build-your-own-pedal-powered-machines.html)
    for when I really need more electricity during overcast days.
    Strictly speaking, this is not a reduction of energy demand, but of
    course it implies an effort from my side. Pedalling for 1 to 1.5
    hours would generate roughly 100 Wh of electricity, which would
    allow me to work on the computer for 3 to 5 hours, or to operate the
    5W LED-light throughout the night.



My barometer.

By keeping an eye on my barometer and being a bit flexible, it's not
that hard to plan work according to the weather. However, until now I
managed to take advantage of these opportunities mostly when it comes to
lighting, and less so when using the laptop. This has nothing to do with
computer use being less flexible than lighting. Rather, it's a
consequence of how the system is built.

This became clear due to the rather clumsy way that I set up my
experiment. Obviously, I wanted to test the installation in the depth of
winter before writing about it. However, I only had two solar panels at
the time. Therefore, I first tested my solar powered home office by
running the laptop on solar energy for two weeks (while running the
lights on grid power), followed by a two-week test of running the lights
on solar energy (and the computer on grid power).

> For lighting, it's impossible to fall back on grid power because I had
> to cut the power cords of all lamps to make them compatible with the
> 12V DC grid

The results were remarkably different for both periods. With the laptop,
I could always fall back on grid power by simply switching the power
cord. Consequently, there were no external factors that forced me to
change my way of working in order to remain within the limits of the
energy budget on a dark day. For lighting, however, it was impossible to
fall back on grid power. I had to cut the power cords of all lamps to
make them compatible with the 12V DC grid, which meant that I could not
run them on AC grid power anymore.

During low power periods, I had no other choice than to lower energy
demand for lighting, and that's exactly what I did, quite effortlessly I
must say. I quickly made an extra desk at the window to avoid using
artificial lights in morning, I switched the lights off whenever I left
the room, and I worked with just a 5W or even a 3W light bulb if
necessary.

Five months later, I have become totally accustomed to adjusting light
levels to available solar power. On the other hand, I keep plugging my
laptop into the grid if energy runs low. Why? Because I can. \[7\]



The new desk at the window.

Consequently, going off-grid seems to be the key to lowering energy
demand considerably. \[8\] Having a limited energy supply also
encourages the use of more energy efficient technology. For example, the
energy savings I made by replacing the two remaining CFL lamps by LEDs
could also have been achieved without building a solar PV system.
However, the option only occurred to me after I took up the challenge of
powering the office with solar energy.

> Progress in energy efficient technology will steadily increase the
> possibilities of my off-grid system, with no risks of rebound effects

If I would not be able to fall back on grid power, I would probably also
get a more energy efficient laptop. \[9\] In the future, I could also
switch to lithium-ion batteries, which have lower losses than lead-acid
batteries. Investing in more energy efficient technology would allow me
to run the computer and the lights longer with the same amount of solar
panels. With a limited power supply, there's no risk of rebound effects
that negate these benefits.

Build Multiple Solar PV Systems
-------------------------------

As mentioned at the beginning of the article, the solar powered home
office is only the first step towards converting the whole apartment to
solar power and going totally off-grid. The second project will be the
installation of a solar system on the 6-metre long balcony in front of
the living room and the (open) kitchen. It will power the lights, the
stereo-installation, the Wifi-router, all computer use outside the
office, and all kitchen appliances.



The bedroom's electricity system.

This second experiment is much more challenging for two reasons. First,
the living room and kitchen will also be used by the second person in
this household, which will make it more complicated to manage energy
use. Furthermore, although we don't have a toaster, a coffeemaker, or a
microwave, the kitchen houses a much used high power appliance: the
electric cookstove.

Because it would take too many solar panels and batteries to power the
electric cookstove by solar PV panels, the plan is to replace it by
non-electric alternatives: one or two solar cookers, a [fireless
cooker]({filename}/posts/cooking-pot-insulation-key-to-sustainable-cooking.md),
and a [rocket
stove]({filename}/posts/thermal-efficiency-cooking-stoves.md)
for the morning coffee. By using direct solar heat, we can make much
more efficient use of the space on the balcony. Another plan is to build
a [low-tech food storage
system](http://www.notechmagazine.com/2012/01/saving-food-from-the-fridge.html)
that can store most of the food outside the refrigerator, keeping this
energy-intensive appliance as small as possible or eliminating it
altogether.

> The balcony solar PV system will be totally independent of the window
> sill solar PV system

The balcony solar PV system will be totally independent of the window
sill solar PV system. There are several advantages to this approach. As
we have seen in the previous article, [cable losses are relatively high
in a low-voltage DC
system]({filename}/posts/slow-electricity-the-return-of-low-voltage-dc-power.md).
Setting up several independent systems greatly limits cable length (and
cable clutter).

Secondly, installing separate systems allows total power use to surpass
150 watts&mdash;which is the safety limit for a 12V DC system. Thirdly,
multiple systems make it possible to start small and gradually expand
the system. This avoids large upfront costs and allows you to learn from
your mistakes.

Learning from your Mistakes
---------------------------

In fact, it was one such mistake that made me decide to install two
separate systems even in my relatively small 10 m2 home office. The two
solar panels in front of the office are connected to half of the
batteries (powering the lights), while the three solar panels in front
of the bedroom are connected to the other half (powering the laptop).

This is because I short-circuited my first solar charge controller and
had to buy a second one while the first one was being repaired. It was
that or go without lights for three weeks. Thus, a final advantage of
multiple systems is increased reliability: if one system fails, there is
still electricity.



If the second experiment succeeds, and of course this remains to be
seen, the plan is to stop the contract with our power provider, which is
to be renewed in December. Obviously, it would be handy to keep a
connection to the grid, but there are two important reasons not to do
this. The first has been outlined above: going off-grid unleashes the
creativity and willingness to lower energy demand.

Secondly, installing a solar system and holding on to a grid connection
is financially disadvantageous. At least here in Spain, more than
two-thirds of the electricity bill consists of fixed costs. Even if we
would use much less grid electricity because of the solar system, our
bill would remain more or less the same.

> If the second experiment succeeds, and of course this remains to be
> seen, the plan is to stop the contract with our power provider

Some important challenges remain, most notably the washing machine, the
bathroom and the laser printer. The problem with washing machine and
bathroom is that they're on the north side of the building, far from the
solar panels. We could go to a laundromat but there are none in town. A
pedal powered washing machine requires space that we don't have.

The laser printer could be operated with an inverter, which can also be
handy to power any other occasional device that doesn't run on 12V DC
power. However, a relatively large and expensive inverter would be
needed, because the startup power of the machine is above 400 watts.
Luckily, I found that out before I fried another costly device.

Before You Start
----------------

There are some things to keep in mind before you decide to install a
low-tech solar PV system:

-   You need enough sun. Solar panels on balconies and window ledges
    won't work everywhere. A similar system like mine, but 1,000 km
    further up north, would produce on average only half the
    electricity, with a much larger difference between winter and
    summer.

<!-- -->

-   You need the right exposure. Even if you're in a sunny climate,
    don't think of harvesting solar power if windows or balconies are
    oriented towards the north, the northwest, or the northeast. Shading
    by other buildings or trees can also smother your ambitions. You
    need at least 4 hours of direct sunshine on the panels each day.

<!-- -->

-   You need to be prepared to lower your energy use. Few apartment
    dwellers will have enough space available to generate sufficient
    solar power for an energy-intensive lifestyle.

<!-- -->

-   It may be impossible to close some windows completely. The cables
    from the panels enter my apartment by slightly opening the sliding
    window of the office. In winter, I cover this gap with cork. I don't
    use heating so no energy gets lost, but this might be problematic in
    other circumstances. You probably shouldn't drill a hole through the
    window or the wall if you are renting the place.

<!-- -->

-   Converting your apartment to solar power doesn't make you "100%
    sustainable". Fossil fuels are used to produce solar panels and
    batteries. The electricity I generate is likely more CO2-intensive
    per kWh than Spanish grid electricity, especially since my panels
    and batteries [are manufactured in
    China]({filename}/posts/how-sustainable-is-pv-solar-power.md).
    The only reason why my system is more sustainable than using grid
    electricity is because it forces me to lower electricity use
    considerably.

Written by Kris De Decker. Edited by [Jenna
Collett](https://www.linkedin.com/in/jenna-collett-0b39251a).

Related articles:

-   [Slow electricity: the comeback of DC
    power]({filename}/posts/slow-electricity-the-return-of-low-voltage-dc-power.md)?
-   [Reinventing the
    greenhouse]({filename}/posts/reinventing-the-greenhouse.md)
-   [Off-grid: how sustainable is stored
    sunlight]({filename}/posts/sustainability-off-grid-solar-power.md)?
-   [How sustainable is Solar PV
    power]({filename}/posts/how-sustainable-is-pv-solar-power.md)?
-   [Restoring the old way of warming: heating people, not
    places]({filename}/posts/heating-people-not-spaces.md)
-   [If we insulate our houses, why not our cooking
    pots]({filename}/posts/cooking-pot-insulation-key-to-sustainable-cooking.md)?
-   [How to make everything ourselves: open modular
    hardware]({filename}/posts/how-to-make-everything-ourselves-open-modular-hardware.md)
-   [The solar envelope: how to heat and cool cities without fossil
    fuels]({filename}/posts/solar-oriented-cities-1-the-solar-envelope.md)

[COULD WE RUN MODERN SOCIETY ON HUMAN POWER
ALONE]({filename}/posts/could-we-run-modern-society-on-human-power-alone.md)?



The [Human Power Plant](http://www.humanpowerplant.be) project
investigates the possibilities of human energy production in a modern
society. It plans to convert a 22-floor building on the campus of
Utrecht University into an entirely human powered student community.

With a combination of low-tech solutions, lifestyle changes, and some
exercise, it demonstrates that 750 students can live a fossil fuel free
life on campus.

Notes & Sources:

\[1\] [Renewable Power Generation Costs in
2014](http://www.irena.org/documentdownloads/publications/irena_re_power_costs_2014_report.pdf)
(PDF), International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA), January 2015

\[2\] [Photovoltaic System Pricing Trends: Historical, Recent, and
Near-Term Projections](http://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy14osti/62558.pdf)
(PDF), 2014 Edition, SunShot, U.S. Departmennt of Energy, September 2014

\[3\] [Soft costs account for most of PV residential installation
costs](http://www.pv-magazine.com/news/details/beitrag/soft-costs-account-for-most-of-pv-residential-installation-costs_100013637/#axzz477QaYckc),
PV Magazine, December 2013

\[4\] [Spain's Photovoltaic Revolution: The Energy Return on Investment
(SpringerBriefs in
Energy)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/144199436X/ref=as_li_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=144199436X&linkCode=as2&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkId=WKZF43FNUGC4XRTT)![](http://ir-na.amazon-adsystem.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=as2&o=1&a=144199436X){width="1"
height="1"}, Pedro A. Prieto & Charles A. Hall, 2013

\[5\] [Power Density: A Key to Understanding Energy Sources and Uses
(MIT
Press)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0262029146/ref=as_li_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0262029146&linkCode=as2&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkId=T2XWJO7P6QGFHAFD)![](http://ir-na.amazon-adsystem.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=as2&o=1&a=0262029146){width="1"
height="1"}, Vaclav Smil, 2015

\[6\] Provided that total power use is below 100-150 watts (which
corresponds to between 8 and 12 ampère for a 12V system). Also make sure
to [properly fuse your solar PV
system](https://www.windynation.com/jzv/inf/how-properly-fuse-solar-pv-system)
to avoid electric fires.

\[7\] Laptop use is further complicated by the laptop battery. If the
battery is not 100% charged, the computer will automatically try to
charge it when you connect it to the solar system. However, power use of
the laptop triples during charging, and unless there is full sun on the
panels my system refuses to provide this amount of power. I "solved"
this by keeping the battery 100% charged.

\[8\] There is interesting academic research about the relationship
between energy infrastructures and energy demand, which we will discuss
in a forthcoming article.

\[9\] Note that [most energy use of a laptop is in the
manufacturing]({filename}/posts/embodied-energy-of-digital-technology.md).
Switching to a more energy-efficient laptop isn't always a sustainable
choice. Buying a second-hand device could be a solution.
