Title: How to Make Everything Ourselves: Open Modular Hardware
Date: 2012-12-15 21:27
Author: Kris De Decker
Category: Low-tech Solutions
Tags: distributed manufacturing, do-it-yourself, open hardware, open modular hardware
Slug: how-to-make-everything-ourselves-open-modular-hardware
Status: published



Reverting to [traditional
handicrafts]({filename}/posts/basketry-the-art-of-producing-sustainable-consumer-goods.md)
is one way to sabotage the throwaway society. In this article, we
discuss another possibility: the design of modular consumer products,
whose parts and components could be re-used for the design of other
products.

Initiatives like OpenStructures, Grid Beam, and Contraptor combine the
modularity of systems like LEGO, Meccano and Erector with the
collaborative power of digital success stories like Wikipedia, Linux or
WordPress.

An economy based on the concept of re-use would not only bring important
advantages in terms of sustainability, but would also save consumers
money, speed up innovation, and take manufacturing out of the hands of
multinationals.


A modular system unites the advantages of standardisation (as parts can
be produced cheaply in large amounts) with the advantages of
customisation (since a large diversity of unique objects can be made
with relatively few parts). Modularity can be found to a greater or
lesser extent in many products (like bicycles and computers) and systems
(like trains and logistics), but the best examples of modular systems
are toys: [LEGO](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lego),
[Meccano](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Meccano), and
[Erector](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Erector_Set) (which is now the
brand name of Meccano in the US).

LEGO, Meccano and Erector are composed of relatively few elementary
building blocks, which can be used to build various objects. The parts
can then be disassembled and re-used to build something completely
different. Apart from the elementary buildings blocks, these
manufacturers have produced many more specific building blocks, which
are less versatile, but further increase customisation possibilities.



All the building blocks in a set of LEGO, Meccano or Erector fit
together because they are designed according to a set of specific rules.
The holes (Meccano and Erector) or studs (LEGO) have a precise diameter
and are spaced apart at specific distances. In addition, the dimensions
of the building blocks are precisely matched to each other. The long
lasting success of LEGO, Meccano and Erector (which appeared on the
market in 1947, 1902 and 1911 respectively) is based on the fact that
those rules have never changed. All new buildings blocks that were added
in the course of the years are compatible with the existing ones. Today,
kids can expand their collection of these toys with that of their
parents or grandparents, and they are worth as much on the second hand
market as they are worth new.

Grid Beam, Bit Beam, Open Beam, Maker Beam and Contraptor

The same principle could be applied to everyday objects, from
coffeemakers to furniture, gadgets, cars and renewable energy systems.
All you need is a standardisation in design. The design rules can be
very simple, as is the case with [Grid Beam](http://www.gridbeam.com/).
This modular construction system, which was developed in 1976, is based
on beams with a simple geometry and a repetitive hole-pattern. The beams
can be made of wood, aluminium, steel, or any other material.



In spite of the simplicity of the design, a great variety of objects can
be constructed. Grid Beam has been used to make all kinds of furniture,
greenhouses, constructions for workshops and industrial processes,
windmills, wheelbarrows, agricultural machinery, vehicles, sheds and
buildings (a book about the system was published in 2009, and [can be
found
online](http://www.gridbeam.com/a-revolution-in-diy-engineering/)). Grid
Beam was inspired by a system envisioned by Ken Isaacs in the 1950s,
[Living
Structures](http://www.publiccollectors.org/CompletePublications.htm),
which used similar beams but contained only a few holes.



In recent years, several systems have appeared that use a very similar
set of rules, based on a repetitive hole pattern. [Bit
Beam](http://bitbeam.org/) is basically a scaled-down version of Grid
Beam, aimed at building smaller structures in balsa-wood, like a laptop
stand or a prototype device. [Contraptor](http://www.contraptor.org/)
uses a similar approach, but is aimed at providing structural metal
frames for DIY 3D-printers, milling machines, or robotics.
[OpenBeam](http://openbeamusa.com/) and
[MakerBeam](https://www.sparkfun.com/products/10540?) are also modular
construction systems based on very simple rules. These are not based on
a hole-pattern, but use T-slot aluminium profiles.
[Makeblock](http://www.kickstarter.com/projects/1397854503/makeblock-next-generation-of-construct-platform)
combines both approaches and includes electronic modules.



Most of these construction systems are limited to the design of
frameworks. There is one system, however, that offers much more
possibilities, because it is based on a more sophisticated set of rules:
[OpenStructures](http://www.openstructures.net/). The project was kicked
off in Brussels in 2007. Unlike all the projects above, OpenStructures
is still in an experimental phase. However, it is interesting enough to
look at in more detail, because it best shows where modular construction
systems may be headed in the future.

OpenStructures

The first basic rule of OpenStructures is shared with Grid Beam and
similar systems: all parts are connected to each other in such a way
that they can be easily disassembled, using bolts and screws rather than
nails or glue. However, the OpenStructures design "language" is
different: it is based on the [OS
Grid](http://openstructures.net/pages/9), which is built around a square
of 4x4 cm and is scalable. The squares can be further subdivided or put
together to form larger squares, without losing inter-compatibility. The
illustration below shows nine complete squares of each 4x4 cm put
together.



The borders of the squares mark the cutting lines (which define the
dimensions of square parts), the diagonals determine the assembly
points, and the circles define the common diameters. As is the case with
LEGO, any modular part has to comply with at least one of these
conditions in order to be compatible with other parts. Either the
dimensions have to correspond with the horizontal and vertical lines, or
the assembly points should be spaced according to the grid, or the
diameters should be similar. Below is a part that fulfills two of three
conditions.



While this set of rules is more sophisticated than that of the Grid Beam
system, complicated it is not. Nevertheless, it allows for the design of
a much larger variety of objects, not just square or rectangular frames.
Over the course of five years, OpenStructures has yielded objects
ranging from household devices to cargo bicycles, suitcases and
furniture.

Open versus Closed Modular Systems

In spite of the similarities, there is one fundamental difference
between modular construction systems such as OpenStructures, Grid Beam
and Contraptor, and modular toys such as LEGO, Meccano and Erector. The
first group consists of "open" modular systems, where everyone is free
to design and produce parts, while the second consists of "closed"
modular systems, where all parts are designed and produced by one
manufacturer. Closed modular systems produce uniform parts. For
instance, all LEGO building blocks are made of plastic. LEGO does not
produce building blocks made of wood, aluminium, glass or ceramics.
There is a limited range of colours. And because LEGO is a closed
system, nobody else is allowed to produce LEGO pieces.



There exist modular construction systems that operate according to the
same principles, like the [T-profiles](http://www.8020.net/) made by
80/20 inc. However, in the modular construction systems that we have
introduced above, everyone is allowed to design and produce parts, as
long as these parts are compatible with the basic set of rules. We find
the same approach with open software, like Linux (an operating system),
OpenOffice (office software) or WordPress (a blogging platform). The
computer code for these systems is being written by a large amount of
people, who all build a part of something larger. Because all
participants stick to a basic set of rules, a great amount of people
can, independently of one another, add parts that are inter-compatible.

> Consumer products based on an open modular system can foster rapid
> innovation, without the drawback of wasting energy and materials

An open modular system has many advantages over a closed modular system.
Since anyone can design parts in an open system, it generates a much
larger diversity of parts: they can be made in different colours and
materials, and none of the producers can set a fixed price for all
consumers. And because many designers constantly review, adapt and
improve each others' work, innovation is accelerated. All open software
systems described above are arguably better than their closed
counterparts, and some of them have become more successful. A closed
modular system only has one advantage: the one who holds the copyright
makes a lot of money.

Sustainable Consumer Goods

Modular construction systems encourage the re-use of physical parts, and
thus form a sustainable alternative to our present-day system of
producing consumer items. Most products that we buy end up in landfills
or incinerators within a couple of years, at most. This is because the
majority of manufacturers encourages consumers to replace their products
as quickly as possible, either by designing objects that break down
easily, or by introducing new generations of products which make the
former generation of products obsolete. This approach not only generates
a massive pile of waste, it squanders an equally massive amount of
energy and raw materials.



Consumer products based on an open modular system can foster rapid
innovation, without the drawback of wasting energy and materials. The
parts of an obsolete generation of products can be used to design the
next generation, or something completely different. Furthermore, modular
objects have built-in repairability.

Open modular construction systems could greatly speed up the diffusion
of low-technologies, such as [pedal-powered
machines]({filename}/posts/pedal-powered-farms-and-factories.md),
[solar thermal
collectors]({filename}/posts/solar-powered-factories.md),
[velomobiles](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/velomobiles/) or [cargo
cycles]({filename}/posts/jobs-of-the-future-cargo-cyclist.md).
Building a windmill or a cargo bike goes much faster when using modular
parts than when using carpentry or welding, and there is no need for
expensive tools or special skills. Mistakes can be easily corrected --
just unscrew the bolts and start again. It would also be interesting to
see modular parts combined with an open hardware project such as the
[Global Village Construction
Set](http://www.notechmagazine.com/2011/05/how-to-build-your-own-industrial-civilization.html),
which generates many interesting designs but makes limited use of
modularity.

Circulation of Parts

"While eBay provides a circulation of objects, and cradle-to-cradle
provides a circulation of materials, modular construction systems
provide a circulation of parts and components", says Thomas Lommée, the
creator of OpenStructures. "Our ambition is to create puzzles instead of
static objects. The system should generate objects of which it is not
entirely clear anymore who designed them. An object evolves as it is
taken in hands by more designers."



The kitchen appliances that were designed in the context of the project
are good examples. A couple of parts were initially made for a coffee
grinder, were then used, together with new parts, by another designer to
build a coffeemaker. This appliance was then further developed into a
water purification device by a third designer. The plastic bottle that
served as a water container was replaced by a cut through glass bottle
containing a clay filter. Thomas Lommée: "By adding or removing
components, or by using them in a different manner, what you get is a
family of objects".

Cargo Cycle

Another prototype that originated from the project, is a cargo cycle.
The rear is a sawed through frame of a standard bicycle, the end of
which is compatible with the OS Grid. This means that the front of the
cycle can be built up in a modular way. Designer Jo Van Bostraeten used
this opportunity to design both a cargo bicycle and a cargo tricycle
(the latter is carrying a 3D-printer), and it doesn't end there.
Together with Lommée, he also constructed a modular motor block. The
unit consists of an electric motor and wheels, on top of which a similar
unit can be placed that holds a battery. Since the units are compatible
with the OS Grid, they can be coupled to the front of the cargo cycle,
resulting in a completely modular motorised cargo vehicle.



The latest "family" of objects to come out of the project is aimed at
children. It is noteworthy that this collection arose from one component
of the cargo cycle&mdash;the container. It is built up from modular parts
that can be bolted together, and can thus be combined in different ways.
A couple of designers got started with those parts, resulting in (among
other things) a sled, a seat, a toy excavator, and a swing. When the
child becomes an adolescent, the parts can be used to make a suitcase or
a tool box, or become part of a cargo cycle that could [make him or her
some pocket
money]({filename}/posts/jobs-of-the-future-cargo-cyclist.md).



More interesting than the objects themselves, is their user support
system. Grid Beam is obviously a product from the pre-internet age.
Those who want to copy a design are encouraged to look at a picture of
someone else's creation and "count the holes". OpenStructures, on the
other hand, leans heavily on online user support. The re-use of parts is
being facilitated by an online database that can be used in three ways.

A Modular Database

First, you can request an overview of [all
objects](http://openstructures.net/pages/14/structures) that were
designed based on the OS grid. The webpage for each object then shows
you the parts and components from which it is made. Second, you can
request an overview of [all
parts](http://openstructures.net/pages/44/parts) that were designed
based on the OS grid. The webpage for each of these shows you which
components and objects they could serve. Third, you can request an
overview of [all
components](http://openstructures.net/pages/11/components). The webpage
for each component shows you their parts and the objects they can be
used for.

> Open modular construction does not mean that everyone should make
> their own consumer products

The webpage for each part, component and object also gives additional
information: the dimensions, the materials, the designer's name, the
licence and the order information. To add to this, all parts and
components receive a serial number. This means that after a modular
object is taken apart, the serial number of each part and component can
be entered into the database to see what else can be made with it.
Missing parts can be obtained via the database: either by ordering them
online, by finding the address of a shop where they sell them, or by
downloading the digital design and making them.

Not Everyone is a Designer

Open modular construction does not mean that everyone should make their
own consumer products. An object like a coffee maker or a workbench
could be obtained in at least three ways. Firstly, the consumer can
download the digital design and then assemble the object with parts that
he or she buys, re-uses, or makes using a 3D-printer or laser cutter,
whether at home or at a fab lab or tech shop. It can also happen in a
more low-tech fashion, as is the case with Grid Beam: the consumer buys
wood or metal beams, and [drills the holes
himself]({filename}/posts/hand-powered-drilling-tools-and-machines.md).



A second option is that a company buys the license of the design (if it
is not free) and converts it into a building kit, comparable to a kit
from LEGO, Meccano or Erector. In this case, the consumer would not have
to search for the parts himself, but he still assembles the product
himself, just like he would assemble a piece of furniture by IKEA.
Similarly, a company could offer a more general building kit, which can
be used to make whatever one would like, similar to a box of basic LEGO
bricks. Bit Beam, Contraptor, Open Beam, Maker Beam and,
[recently](http://news.cnet.com/8301-32973_3-57440288-296/after-more-than-30-years-grid-beam-modular-construction-system-comes-to-market/),
Grid Beam offer one or both of these options.

The third possibility is that a manufacturer places the object on the
market as a finished, assembled product. The coffee maker or the
workbench would then be sold and bought just as any other product today,
but it can be disassembled after use, and its parts can be re-used for
other objects.

Economic Model: who Produces the Parts?

While the design process behind OpenStructures and other open modular
construction systems is identical to that of digital products such as
Wikipedia, Linux or WordPress, there is also a fundamental difference.
Computer code and digital text accumulate without any material costs.
This is not the case with objects. This makes open modular hardware less
easy, but it also creates economic opportunities. It's hard to make
money with open software or online writing. However, in the case of an
open modular system for objects, someone has to provide the materials.

It is also important that the parts are produced by as many
manufacturers as possible, so that they are available worldwide.
Otherwhise, the shipping costs can be so high that a modular object
becomes too expensive.



There are many opportunities to make money with an open modular
construction model. A manufacturer can choose to produce a part in which
they sees economic potential. Another manufacturer can choose to sell a
building kit or a finished product of a design they think will sell. A
designer can make money by uploading a design that might be free to
download for personal use, but not for commercial use. A manufacturer
that wants to commercialise this design, can then buy the licence from
the designer.

Craftsmen can focus on the design of exclusive, handmade parts in
special materials, which are compatible with popular mass produced
items. Others can start a fab lab or a tech shop where people can build
their own modular objects for a monthly fee. In short, an open modular
construction system offers economic opportunities for everybody.

Collaborative Economy

"It is not our ambition to build a gigantic factory that produces all
possible parts", Lommée notes. "OpenStructures should not become a
modular IKEA. Our ambition is the creation of a collective economic
system, where one producer benefits from the production of another
producer. Because parts which are made by one, can be used by another.
What we would like to see, are streets full of little shops where
everybody generates their own little part of a larger system, a
collaborative economy where small, self-employed producers have their
place. Not one big player that makes everything. The social dimension is
very important."



"If IKEA wants to sell a product that is compatible with our system,
then that's fine with me. But the system can only work if it remains
open. The larger it becomes, the easier it is for a small company or a
craftsman to be a part of it. The ambition is to start a universal,
collaborative puzzle that allows the widest possible range of people --
from craftsmen to multinationals&mdash;to design, build and exchange the
widest possible range of modular parts and components."

Organising Re-use

Apart from a design language (the OS grid) and an online database,
OpenStructures also has set up a prototype of a warehouse in Brussels.
This kind of place should become the hub for the organisation of the
re-use of parts and components. Think a fab lab or tech shop, but then
combined with the storage of modular parts. If a modular product is no
longer needed, and the owner does not feel like using the parts to build
something new, he or she brings it to one of these places, where it is
taken apart, and its parts are stored.

> An open modular construction system offers economic opportunities for
> everybody

Other people could come to this place to buy parts or to use them on
site to build something new. As Lommée says: "Not everyone has to make
their own products, but after its useful life, a modular product always
comes into the hands of a group of people who like to make things."

Compatibility between Open Modular Systems

While it is still in an experimental phase, OpenStructures is by far the
most ambitious and complete open modular system designed to date.
However, being a European project, it follows the international metric
system, while the much older Grid Beam follows the imperial system. The
systems are not compatible. With more and more open modular systems
appearing, would it not be important to provide inter-compatibility
between them?



Lommée doesn't think so: "Most of these systems are designed for
different applications. For instance, Contraptor aims at precision,
because the parts are used to build robots and other sophisticated
machines. Esthetics are clearly not important. I am a designer, so what
interests me especially is whether or not a modular system can generate
beautiful objects, things you would want to put in your interior. There
is also [Wikispeed](http://www.wikispeed.com/), for instance, which
concentrates on the development of a modular car.
[Arduino](http://www.arduino.cc/) is aimed at electronics. I don't think
that all of these modular systems have to be compatible with each other
because the applications are very different."



He goes on to explain why he chose the metric system. "I have been
doubting a lot about this. But in the end I decided that the metric
system is easier to work with. And I think the world is big enough for
two systems&mdash;just look at the variety of energy standards which are in
use. Somebody has developed a [European version of
Contraptor](http://www.contraptor.org/forum/t-273404/contraptor-openstructures),
based on the metric system and compatible with the OS grid. And it is
always possible to design a coupling between two systems, so that they
can be used together. On the other hand, we live in a networked world
where everything is connected and copied. This often means that when
standards compete, only one survives. And this is not necessarily the
best one. I'll keep my fingers crossed."

Kris De Decker (edited by [Deva Lee](http://theculturemuncher.com/)).
This article is also available in
[Spanish](http://www.es.lowtechmagazine.com/2013/08/hardware-modular-abierto.html).

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------



Related Articles:

-   [How to make everything
    yourself]({filename}/posts/how-to-make-everything-yourself-online-lowtech-resources.md):
    online low-tech resources
-   [DIY category](http://www.notechmagazine.com/diy/) at [No Tech
    Magazine](http://www.notechmagazine.com/)
-   [The art of producing sustainable consumer goods:
    basketry]({filename}/posts/basketry-the-art-of-producing-sustainable-consumer-goods.md)
-   [The bright future of solar thermal powered factories and
    workshops]({filename}/posts/solar-powered-factories.md)
-   [Pedal powered farms and
    factories]({filename}/posts/pedal-powered-farms-and-factories.md):
    the forgotten future of the stationary bicycle
-   [Hand powered drilling tools and
    machines]({filename}/posts/hand-powered-drilling-tools-and-machines.md)
-   [Velomobiles]({filename}/posts/electric-velomobiles.md)
    and [cargo
    cycles]({filename}/posts/jobs-of-the-future-cargo-cyclist.md)
-   [Lost knowledge: ropes and
    knots](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/knots/)
-   [Human powered cranes and lifting
    devices]({filename}/posts/history-of-human-powered-cranes.md)
-   [Heat your house with car tyres and
    earth]({filename}/posts/heat-your-house.md)
-   [Download, print, fold,
    paste]({filename}/posts/download-print.md)

[Main page](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/).

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
