Title: Cargo cyclists replace truck drivers on European city streets
Date: 2012-09-24 13:14
Author: Kris De Decker
Category: Low-tech Solutions
Tags: cargo bicycles, cargo bikes, cargo tricycles
Slug: jobs-of-the-future-cargo-cyclist
Status: published



Those with strong cycling legs have ever more jobs up for grabs in
Europe these days. A growing number of businesses are using cargo
cycles, a move towards sustainable and free-flowing city traffic that is
now strongly backed by public authorities.

Research indicates that at least one quarter of all cargo traffic in
European cities could be handled by cycles. And, by using special
distribution hubs, larger vehicles and electric assist, this proportion
could be even larger.

A cargo cycle is at least as fast as a delivery van in the city - and
much cheaper to use, giving a strong economic incentive to make the
switch. Cargo cycles also bring important economic advantages to
tradesmen, artisans and service providers.

Picture: a cargo bike in Germany (source: "[Ich ersetze ein
Auto](http://www.ich-ersetze-ein-auto.de/)").


Cargo transport in cities is extremely inefficient. As it currently
stands, almost 100 percent of it is done by motorised vehicles, ranging
from personal cars to commercial delivery vans and trucks (lorries).
However, these heavy vehicles often transport very light goods. The
average payload transported in European cities weighs less than 100 kg
(220 lbs) and has a volume of less than 1m3 (1). Of the 1,900 vans and
trucks that enter the city of Breda in the Netherlands each day, less
than 10 percent of the cargo being delivered requires a van or truck and
40 percent of deliveries involve just one box (2).

This means that a large share of the cargo being moved in and out of
cities could be transported by cargo cycles. Fast, two-wheeled cargo
cycles have a load capacity of up to 180 kg (396 lbs), while slower
vehicles with three or four wheels can easily take 250 kg (550 lbs).
Using a tandem configuration and/or an electric power assistance can
help raise the load capacity even further, to about half a ton. Cargo
volume ranges from at least 0.25 m3 for bicycles to more than 1.5 m3 for
larger tricycles and quadricycles.

Freight traffic takes up a large portion of total daytime road transport
in cities, often as high as 50 percent in large cities, and up to 90
percent in very large cities such as London and Paris (3). The 'last
mile' is currently regarded as one of the most expensive, least
efficient and most polluting sections of the entire logistics chain.
This is because traffic congestion makes the driving cycle very
irregular, leading to a very high fuel consumption and a loss of time.

Cargo cycles are fast, efficient, clean and quiet

The positive ecological and social consequences of substituting cargo
cycles for delivery vans are obvious: important fuel savings, less
pollution, less noise, more space in a more enjoyable city, less
congestion, and less serious accidents. However, this is not all. There
are as many economic benefits as there are ecological and social
benefits, though they are not so obvious at first sight.



Picture: CycleLogistics.

To begin with, cargo cycles operating in the city are as fast as, or
even faster than, vans and trucks (4). This is because they are less
affected by traffic congestion, and because they can often take faster
routes where trucks and vans cannot go, such as pedestrian streets,
alleys or bicycle paths. Because cargo cycles are less affected by
variable traffic conditions, journey times are more reliable. Moreover,
they are able to enter the city 24 hours a day, while many Europeans
cities have set very strict time windows for loading and unloading of
trucks and vans. Cargo cycles have generally no difficulty finding a
place to load or unload and can often stop right in front of the door or
even enter a building.

98 percent cheaper

Secondly, cargo cycles are much cheaper than vans. The purchase price of
an average cargo cycle does not exceed 3,000 euro, and the largest
three- and four-wheeled cargo cycles with electric assist sell for about
7,000 to 10,000 euro. Buying a van sets you back at least 20,000 euro.
However, for either mode of transport this cost is small compared with
the running and staff costs. The real advantage of the cargo cycle lies
in its low cost of use. A car, van or truck consumes fuel, a cargo cycle
does not. Moreover, taxes, insurance, storage and depreciation are all
lower for cycles than for vans, which can result in significant cost
savings (5). All together, a cargo cycle can be up to 98 percent cheaper
per km than the alternatives (4/6).

> Because a cargo cycle is as fast as a delivery van in city traffic,
> and because it can move as much cargo as the van usually does,
> substituting cargo cycles for delivery vans will not require
> additional drivers.

These savings can be achieved without the loss of jobs. Some people
promote the use of cargo cycles by saying that they will bring *more*
jobs. However, this is only half true. If cargo cycles become more
successful, other jobs will disappear, notably those of van and truck
drivers. Because the cargo cycle is as fast as the delivery van in city
traffic, and because it can move as much cargo as the van usually does,
substituting cargo cycles for delivery vans will not require additional
drivers. (On longer routes outside the city, this would be different).
This is actually good news, because it means that labour costs will not
rise. Indirectly, however, cargo cycles can indeed create jobs (see
further).

Europe promotes cargo cycling

European authorities clearly recognize the economic and ecological
potential of cargo cycles. Running from May 2011 until April 2014, the
EU-funded project
[CycleLogistics](http://cyclelogistics.eu/index.php?id=4) aims to reduce
energy used in urban freight transport by replacing unnecessary
motorised vehicles with cargo bikes in European cities. The project aims
to expand the niche market position of cargo cycles, so that they will
be viewed as a serious alternative for the transport of goods in inner
cities. According to research undertaken by the project, cyclists could
easily move 25 percent of all cargo in cities (considering loads up to
250 kg) (1/2).

CycleLogistics will communicate the potential of cargo cycles to
different target groups such as the transport sector, municipalities,
service providers, tradesmen, artisans and individuals. In order to
stimulate companies and service providers to integrate the cargo cycle
into their activities, the project is lending 2,000 cargo cycles to
businesses and municipal services so that they can test them out. Their
use will be documented and analysed, and the findings will be published
in a research paper.



Picture: CycleLogistics.

CycleLogistics will motivate municipalities to create a regulatory
framework and policies for cargo cycles, and they will be testing and
reporting on various cargo bike models, promoting their uptake by
consumers, authorities and businesses alike; UK research has found that
perception is probably the biggest single factor inhibiting the use of
cycle freight (5). The reluctance to use cycle freight is due more to a
lack of information on the vehicles and options now available rather
than due to entrenched attitudes against using cycle power.

Electric assisted cargo cycles in Germany

The German Federal Ministry for the Environment has set up a similar
pilot project, named "[Ich ersetze ein
Auto](http://www.ich-ersetze-ein-auto.de/)" ("I replace a car"), which
began in July 2012 and will continue for two years. Contrary to the
European-wide project, it will be aimed exclusively at courier services
and make use of electric assist cargo cycles. Forty vehicles will be
used for two years in nine major German cities. The [cargo
bikes](http://www.ich-ersetze-ein-auto.de/ibullitt-pedelec-solar/) can
transport a load with a weight of 100 kg and a volume of 250 litres
(0.25 m3). Because these loads can also be moved by non-assisted cargo
cycles, the electric assist is aimed at further increasing delivery
speeds and extending the driver's range.

> In Berlin, it was found that cargo cycles using electric assist can
> replace up to 85 percent of car trips made by courier services.

Preliminary research by the German Institute of Transport Research
showed that cargo cycles using electrical assist [can replace 85 percent
of car trips made by courier services in the
city](http://www.dlr.de/dlr/desktopdefault.aspx/tabid-10122/333_read-4933/).
This was demonstrated during an experiment in Berlin using an additional
city hub to coordinate distribution of goods (the
'[Bentobox](http://www.polisnetwork.eu/publicnews/164/45/Urban-hub-quot-BentoBox-quot-fosters-cargo-bike-deliveries-in-Berlin/)').
The German pilot project will result in a research paper detailing the
economic potential of cargo cycles, the energy and emissions savings,
and the necessary improvements in infrastructure and legislation.

As mentioned earlier, the focus of cargo transport by cycles is on the
"first mile" and "last mile". Goods are delivered by vans and trucks to
a (central) distribution hub, from where they are taken to their final
destination by cargo cycle (or the other way around). An alternative is
to use vans (or even
[boats](http://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_embedded&v=qVyW5-5fMqc)
or [cargo trams](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tram#Cargo_trams)) as
mobile hubs. UK based cargo cycle courier [Outspoken
Delivery](http://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&ved=0CCEQFjAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.outspokendelivery.co.uk%2F&ei=JMNdUOOsN7CW0QWpuYBw&usg=AFQjCNHaGv9cG4kTeFcrdim7MKBIpD90yQ&sig2=y5G7XIEw7i3GWpgXQNt8iw)
uses folding bikes in combination with trains for speedy intercity
deliveries between Cambridge and London. Cargo cycles as a last mile
city transport option match very well with the research into
[trolleytrucks for goods transport on longer
distances](http://www.notechmagazine.com/2012/05/siemens-rediscovers-trolleytrucks.html).
Of course, cargo cycles can also be complemented with fully electric
light vehicles in the city, such as the
[Cargohopper](http://www.notechmagazine.com/2009/10/cargohopper.html).

Courier services

A logical target group for cargo cycles are courier services. The German
and the European projects aim to introduce cargo cycles to both courier
companies using motorised vehicles and courier enterprises using normal
bicycles. The first group can save costs and will be able to offer a
faster service when replacing delivery vans by cargo cycles, while the
second group can use cargo cycles to extend their market by transporting
heavier and/or bulkier loads.



Picture: CycleLogistics.

An additional incentive for traditional courier services is that they
will have an easier job finding employees, because the drivers do not
require a (special) driving licence. Larger fleet managers already find
it hard to recruit drivers. Furthermore, the relatively low price of the
cargo cycle allows courier services to build a larger and more
diversified fleet of vehicles. In this way, it is always possible to
choose the fastest and most compact vehicle.

Cargo cycles are already used by courier services in (for example)
[Brussels](http://ecopostale.be/fr/Default.Aspx),
[Londen](http://www.bikebiz.com/news/read/ups-turns-to-bicycles-during-london-2012),
[New York](http://www.checkercourier.com/),
[Berkeley](http://www.pedalexpress.com/),
[Zürich](http://www.veloblitz.ch/?page_id=507),
[Basel](http://www.kurierzentrale.ch/home/angebot/flotte.html),
[Vienna](http://heavypedals.at/), [Graz](http://www.bko.cc/),
[Rome](http://www.typepad.com/site/blogs/6a00e0099229e8883300e008d803f58834/compose/preview/www.eadessopedala.blogspot.it),
[Reggio](http://gazzettadireggio.gelocal.it/cronaca/2012/03/13/news/il-corriere-del-centro-e-green-fa-le-consegne-solo-in-bicicletta-1.3282790)
and [San
Sebastian](http://www.eltis.org/index.php?ID1=7&id=61&video_id=60).
These are often relatively small companies, but sometimes large logistic
enterprises use cargo cycles, too. DHL applies cargo cycles in [15 Dutch
cities](http://www.logistiek.nl/Distributie/duurzaam-transport/2012/5/DHL-voegt-zeven-stadscentra-toe-aan-parcycle-project-LOGNWS113289W/).
The largest courier service to date using (electric assist) cargo cycles
is the French [La Petite
Reine](http://www.lapetitereine.com/fr/index.php), which delivers goods
in Bordeaux, Paris, Lyon and Toulouse.

The European project CycleLogistics proposes to develop and implement a
next day delivery operation in conjunction with leading national and
international delivery companies, in which cargo bikes are used for the
final mile delivery. Cooperation with large courier services is
important because regular and frequent collections and deliveries are
needed to have a sustainable business model. One of the main outputs of
these experiments in several cities will be a formalised and
transferable business model for running a cycle based courier business
which can be adopted by couriers across towns and cities in Europe.

> The cargo cycle allows service providers to start a business with a
> much lower investment, and to operate it at considerably lower costs.

Other companies also discover the advantages of cargo cycles, often for
the delivery of their goods to customers' houses. These are often small
enterprises such as suppliers of organic food, but also larger companies
like retail chain FNAC who delivers products ordered online via cargo
cycle in Barcelona and Madrid. IKEA puts (large) cargo cycles at the
disposal of their customers in some Dutch and Danish cities.

Tradesmen & service providers

Another target group of the European cargo cycle project are commercial
service suppliers, tradesmen and artisans such as window cleaners,
electricians, builders, chimney sweeps, locksmiths, painters, repairmen,
carpenters, gardeners, plumbers, scrap dealers, professional
photographers, musicians, street and market vendors, distributors of
magazines, newspapers and advertisements, and so on.

Copenhagen has carpenters and electricians using cargo cycles, and
window cleaners using cargo cycles have been spotted in Austria and in
England. Home bicycle repair is another example. These services, which
have been operating in many large cities for some years now, often use
vans. However, a mobile bicycle repair that introduces extra automobile
traffic is not very logical, so individuals in
[Copenhagen](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1JtOL6TUVd8&feature=player_embedded&noredirect=1#!),
[Cologne](http://www.fahrradambulanz.com/),
[Berlin](http://www.radambulanz.de/andere.htm) and
[Brussels](http://www.velofixer.com/en.html) have taken the idea one
step further by using the technology they promote.



Picture: CycleLogistics.

Just as the cargo cycle brings economic advantages to courier services,
so it does for tradesmen, artisans and service providers. The vehicle
allows them to start a business with a much lower investment, and to
operate it at considerably lower costs. No motorised vehicle is
required, and even a shop is not a necessity. The cargo cycle can thus
indirectly bring more (self-employed) jobs.

Local authorities are another target group for cargo cycles. The
vehicles could be used for maintenance of city infrastructure such as
parks and roads, for repairs, senior citizens care, garbage collection
or transporting official documents. This would lower the costs of
municipal services, making it possible to use taxes for other aims (or
even lowering them).

Learning from the past

Many proposed applications of the cargo bicycle are everything but new
(7). During the first half of the twentieth century, service providers
and artisans were among the main users of cargo cycles. Almost every
profession made use of cargo cycles which were [specially designed to
carry the tools of their
trade](http://www.notechmagazine.com/2010/06/tandem-cargo-tricycle-1940.html).
These were both commercially available models as well as self-adapted
vehicles. Cargo cycles also played an important role in the delivery of
goods, mostly bread, meat, vegetables, fruit and dairy products. Again,
every profession used a cargo cycle that was best suited to perform the
specific duty. Cargo cycles were a large improvement over horse, donkey
or dog powered carts, which were slower and much more expensive to
operate.

> During the first half of the twentieth century, tradesmen and artisans
> made use of cargo cycles which were specially designed to carry the
> tools of their trade.

Delivery of goods such as bread or meat was often done using a sturdy
safety bicycle equipped with cargo platforms, boxes or baskets in
different sizes fixed to the frame, mostly in the front. These vehicles,
which have a payload of about 75 kg (165 lbs), are known as 'bakery
bikes' or 'butcher bikes' and can still be seen on the streets of Danish
and Dutch cities. In the late 1920s an extended form of carrier bicycle
appeared in Denmark, in which a load-carrying platform was inserted
between the rider and the front wheel, which now being entirely separate
from the handlebars, was steered by a tie-rod passing under the
platform.



Picture: transportfiets.nl

This platform was low down for stability and ease of loading. These
bikes, which earned the nick-name
'[long-john](http://www.longjohn.org/)' and have payloads up to 180 kg,
were (and are again) used for speedy deliveries of somewhat heavier and
bulkier goods. Three-wheeled cargo bikes, still known as a 'bakfiets'
and able to carry even heavier loads at the expense of speed, where most
often used by craftsmen providing services in different locations.

Private use of cargo cycles

A final target group of cargo cycles are private individuals. People who
regularly ride bikes in cities, often still have a car in case something
larger or heavier has to be transported, whether this concerns shopping,
moving stuff or leisure activities. The cargo cycle is a much cheaper
option which is just as effective. However, individual ownership of
cargo cycles is impeded by limited parking space in dense, urban
centres. Moreover, for people who can't afford a car, buying a cargo
cycle might still be too high an investment.

But all this can be solved. The [LastenRad
Kollektiv](http://lastenradkollektiv.blogsport.de/) in Vienna, Austria,
rents out cargo cycles to individuals who want to transport something
big or heavy and prefer not to use a car. People pay a voluntary fee,
which is used to maintain the bikes.
[Velogistics](http://www.velogistics.net/en/), a project that was
inspired by it, tries to do the same at a European scale, by building an
online database of people owing a cargo cycle and willing to lend it.

Will cargo cycles work everywhere?

The potential of the cargo cycle remains unclear. Presently, research is
very scarce. This is remarkable, since no other technology seems to
offer so many benefits for urban freight transportation. Yet, the
possibilities of cargo cycles will depend on several factors, which
might make them less suited in other places. All cities where cargo
cycles have taken off to some degree, are flat. Having to pedal a cargo
cycle up a hill will raise delivery times considerably, which means loss
of time compared to motorised options. Electric assist can help, but
there might be better options for city cargo transport in hilly or
mountainous regions, such as gravity-powered [cable
cars]({filename}/posts/water-powered-cable-trains.md)
and [aerial
ropeways]({filename}/posts/aerial-ropeways-automatic-cargo-transport.md).

Secondly, cargo cycles are especially useful in European cities with
their large historical centres consisting of narrow, winding streets. In
North-American cities the average speed of motor traffic in cities is
generally higher because of much wider roads, and the speed advantage of
cargo cycles may disappear. Population density also influences the
usefulness of cargo cycles, which again plays into the hands of European
cities. A third observation is that cities where cargo cycles are again
in use already had a relatively strong bicycle culture and a decent
cycle infrastructure prior to their arrival. If there is no (safe) space
for cargo cycles, they cannot be used.

Kris De Decker

Notes:

\(1) "[CycleLogistics](http://cyclelogistics.eu/index.php?id=4)" (2012)

\(2) "[Bikes instead of
lorries](http://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&ved=0CCMQFjAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Flibraryeuroparl.wordpress.com%2F2012%2F07%2F16%2Fbikes-in-stead-of-lorries%2F&ei=iRZeUJ6aMYWShgeThYG4Ag&usg=AFQjCNFneW8tzyGJFk2A8twm25J8q3rwhw&sig2=8GCiJikPrzd0l7zyl1-Sfg)"
(2012)

\(3) "[Das Lastenfahrrad als Transportmittel für städtischen
Wirtshaftsverkehr](http://www.muenchen.ihk.de/mike/ihk_geschaeftsfelder/standortpolitik/Anhaenge/Das-Lastenfahrrad-als-Transportmittel-fuer-staedtischen-Wirtschaftsverkehr.pdf)"
(2012)

\(4) "[Ich ersetze ein Auto](http://www.ich-ersetze-ein-auto.de/)" (2012)

\(5) "[Cycle freight in London: a scoping
study](http://www.tfl.gov.uk/assets/downloads/businessandpartners/cycle-as-freight-may-2009.pdf)"
(2009)

\(6) "[Gesamtwirtschaftlicher Vergleich von Pkw- und
Radverkehr](https://zidapps.boku.ac.at/abstracts/download.php?dataset_id=8320&property_id=107&role_id=NONE)"
(2010)

\(7) "[Short history of cargo
cycling](http://cyclelogistics.eu/docs/111/D2_1_Short_History_of_Cargo_Cycling.doc)",
CycleLogistics (2012)

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Related articles:



-   [How to downsize a transport
    network]({filename}/posts/the-chinese-wheelbarrow.md):
    the Chinese wheelbarrow
-   [Aerial
    ropeways]({filename}/posts/aerial-ropeways-automatic-cargo-transport.md):
    automatic cargo transport for a bargain
-   [The
    velomobile]({filename}/posts/the-velomobile-high-tech-bike-or-low-tech-car.md):
    high-tech bike or low-tech car?
-   [Electric
    velomobiles]({filename}/posts/electric-velomobiles.md):
    as fast and comfortable as a car, but 80 times more efficient
-   [How to make everything
    ourselves]({filename}/posts/how-to-make-everything-ourselves-open-modular-hardware.md):
    open modular hardware
-   [Get wired
    (again)]({filename}/posts/trolleytrucks-trolleybuses-cargotrams.md):
    trolleybuses and trolleytrucks
-   [The status quo of electric
    cars]({filename}/posts/the-status-quo-of-electric-cars-better-batteries-same-range.md):
    better batteries, same range
-   [Wood gas
    vehicles]({filename}/posts/wood-gas-cars.md):
    firewood in the fuel tank
-   [Water powered cable
    trains]({filename}/posts/electric-road-trains-in-germany-1901-1950.md)
-   [The age of
    speed]({filename}/posts/speed-energy.md):
    how to reduce global fuel consumption by 75 percent?
-   [The Citroen
    2CV]({filename}/posts/citroen-2cv.md):
    cleantech from the 1940s
-   [A world without
    trucks]({filename}/posts/a-world-without.md):
    underground freight networks
-   [Low-tech indoor
    truck](http://www.notechmagazine.com/2009/10/lowtech-indoor-truck.html):
    the Monark transport kick-scooter
-   [Why bicycles are faster than
    cars](http://www.notechmagazine.com/2010/04/the-industrialization-of-traffic-why-bicycles-are-faster-than-cars.html)

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
