Title: How to Keep Warm in a Cool House
Date: 2015-03-11 16:16
Author: Kris De Decker
Category: Low-tech Solutions
Slug: local-heating
Status: published



Combining the [old local heating
practices]({filename}/posts/heating-people-not-spaces.md)
with [modern radiant and conductive heating
systems]({filename}/posts/radiant-and-conductive-heating-systems.md)
could lower energy consumption, improve health, and increase thermal
comfort. This is especially true for uninsulated buildings, where air
heating is particularly disadvantageous. Local heating sources can be
applied on their own, but can also be used in combination with air
heating. This may mean, however, that thermal comfort standards need to
be redefined.

Illustration by [Diego
Marmolejo](https://www.behance.net/diegomarmolejo).


Heating is a huge source of fossil energy use in cooler climates. In the
Netherlands, for instance, heating accounts for 20 to 25% of total
primary energy use, despite relatively mild winters. This means heat
supply guzzles as much fuel as transportation. \[1\] According to many,
the solution to the high energy use of heating systems is to be found in
better strategies for thermal insulation.

A well-insulated building can indeed lower energy use spectacularly, to
the point that there's no need for a heating system: the heat produced
by people, electric devices and the sun can ensure thermal comfort.
[Orientating a building (or a whole city) around the
sun]({filename}/posts/solar-oriented-cities-1-the-solar-envelope.md)
is another important design element that can render heating redundant.
For new buildings, the design and the orientation are much more
important factors for energy efficiency than the choice of the heating
system, if that's needed at all.

When we talk about existing buildings, however, things look very
different. There are several methods for insulating older buildings, but
their effect on energy use is usually limited in comparison to what a
new building can achieve. What's more, insulating existing buildings can
be expensive and some of the easier-to-apply methods can cause problems,
such as crack formation, frost damage, mould and rot. \[1\] And, of
course, it's not easy to re-orientate an existing building toward the
sun.

If we rely solely on insulation, solar energy and sustainable
architecture, it would take too much time to address the high energy use
of buildings. Based on the current yearly number of new construction in
the Netherlands, it would take 88 years before the Dutch building stock
would meet today's strict insulation standards, for example. \[1\] And
that doesn't take into account the energy required to demolish old
buildings and build new ones. \[2\] If we are serious about reducing our
dependence on fossil fuels, we'll also need to find affordable
short-term solutions that can lower energy use in existing buildings.

Local Heating as an Alternative to Insulation

One previously discussed solution is clothing. [Insulating the body is
more efficient than insulating a
building]({filename}/posts/body-insulation-thermal-underwear.md),
and thermal underclothing is particularly effective. In this article, we
discuss another solution, which can be applied on its own or in
combination with better clothing: local heating.

Contrary to air heating, which distributes warmth throughout a space,
[radiant and conductive heating
systems]({filename}/posts/radiant-and-conductive-heating-systems.md)
act much more locally; they can make people comfortable without having
to warm the whole space. Radiant heating systems transfer energy through
electromagnetic waves (in many ways similar to the energy coming from
the sun), which are converted to heat when absorbed by the skin.
Conductive heating systems warm the body through direct physical
contact.


thermal image showing the heat loss of a building.
[Source](http://developer.mbed.org/components/MLX90614-I2C-Infrared-Thermometer/).

While local heating systems could improve thermal comfort and energy
efficiency in most types of buildings, they are extra advantageous in
older, uninsulated buildings. This is because they provide comfort at
colder air temperatures, decreasing the heat loss from the building and
thus making thermal insulation relatively less important.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

If we are looking for quick and substantial energy savings for existing
buildings, then local heating systems deserve our closest attention

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Insulation can further improve the energy efficiency and thermal comfort
of radiant and conductive heating systems, so this is certainly not a
plea against insulation. But if we are looking for quick and substantial
energy savings for the large share of uninsulated buildings, then local
heating systems deserve our closest attention. Switching from air
heating to radiant and conductive heating, or combining them in a hybrid
system, can bring energy savings that are at least as large as
insulating an existing building.

Hybrid Systems: The Best of Both Worlds?

In a report for Historic Scotland titled "[Keeping Warm in a Cool
House](http://www.historic-scotland.gov.uk/technicalpaper14.pdf)" (PDF),
researcher Michael Humphreys advocates a return to the old-fashioned way
of heating, combined with modern heating devices, in historic buildings
throughout Scotland (some 20% of the total housing stock). Humphreys
argues that this approach should be considered more often at the expense
of thermal insulation, which is more expensive and changes the character
of a building. \[3\]

He proposes a hybrid system in which an air heating system delivers a
"background temperature" of about 16ºC (61ºF), a sufficiently high
temperature for household activities. For sedentary activities like
reading, studying or watching television, local heating systems provide
thermal micro-climates of 21-23ºC (70-73ºF) using radiant heat sources.

A hybrid system has interesting advantages. Because air heating is so
inefficient&mdash;the whole volume of air in a space has to be warmed --
large energy savings can be obtained even if the thermostat is turned
down just a few degrees. At the same time, the background temperature
delivered by the air heating system improves thermal comfort because the
difference in climate between local hot spots and the rest of the room
(the "radiant temperature assymetry") becomes smaller.


hooded chair protects against radiant temperature assymetry. "[Ahrend
Kaigan
Chair](http://www.designswelove.com/2011/03/22/ahrend-kaigan-chair-marijn-van-der-poll/)",
Marijn van der Pol

Local insulation, in the form of hooded chairs and folding screens, can
further protect the body from the colder parts of the space, increasing
comfort in an uninsulated building. Finally, in a hybrid system, the
local heating sources should not be dimensioned for exceptionally cold
periods, and the air heating can be of a lower capacity. \[3\]

Energy Savings

For every 1ºC (1.8ºF) that the thermostat is lowered, 7-10% of heating
energy can be saved. \[4\] If the temperature in the space is lowered
from 21 to 16ºC (70 to 61ºF), the energy savings can be as high as
35-50%. The heating sources that produce warmer microclimates introduce
extra energy use that, of course, should also be taken into account.

According to Humphreys, local heating can save 30-40% of energy compared
to air-heating alone, taking into account the (primary) energy use of
the local heating sources. In an old, uninsulated building in Scotland,
he calculated, a vertically positioned radiant heat source needs to
provide 425 watts per person to achieve the desired microclimate at a
background temperature of 16ºC (61ºF). \[3\]

Using local insulation&mdash;an antique hooded chair&mdash;this comes down to
340 watts per person, which can be provided by a radiant heating panel
of only 60x60 cm. In his experiments, Humphreys makes use of outdated
radiant heating systems from the 1970s, so that his results may be on
the conservative side. \[3\]

> Local heating can save 30-40% of energy compared to air-heating alone,
> taking into account the energy use of the local heating sources

Conductive heating systems can be even more energy efficient. According
to a recent study, a heated office chair can keep 92% of subjects (with
[clothing
insulation]({filename}/posts/body-insulation-thermal-underwear.md)
of 0.8 clo) comfortable at an operative temperature of 18ºC (64ºF),
while 74% of subjects are still comfortable at only 16ºC (61ºF). The
desk chair itself uses only 16 watts (around 30-40 watts primary energy
if electricity is generated by fossil fuels), demonstrating the
effectiveness of heat transfer through conduction. \[5\]

The numbers Humphreys provides are in line with research investigating
summer comfort in offices, which showed that [ventilating fans and other
personal cooling devices are preferred over air-conditioning, while
using much less
energy]({filename}/posts/circulating-fans-air-conditioning.md).

Few People, Lots of Space

While local heating systems have the potential to be more sustainable
and save large amounts of energy, this effect is not guaranteed. There
are situations in which local heating will use more energy than air
heating. Likewise, exactly how much energy can be saved by local heating
depends on many factors: the interior volume of a space, the amount of
people in it, how frequently the space is used, the insulation level of
the building, the ventilation requirements, the efficiency of the local
heating system, and the efficiency of the air heating system.

The most important factors are the volume of the space and the amount of
people who use it. Obviously, the larger the space and the less people
are inside, the more interesting local heating will become compared to
an air heating system. Local heating systems also become comparatively
more efficient as ceilings become higher. Hot air rises, and so the
energy efficiency of air heating further deteriorates in spaces with
high ceilings. It's no coincidence that churches in northern countries
have been heated by [giant tile
stoves](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/oven-stove-in-russian-church.html)
for ages.



Another factor is the local heating system. Radiant heating is not tied
to a specific primary energy source. For instance, hot water for a
hydronic heating panel can be delivered by a solar collector,
electricity, a heat pump or a gas, coal, or wood-fired boiler.
Naturally, the choice of the primary energy source will affect the
energy efficiency of the heating system. In particular, the use of
[electric radiant
panels]({filename}/posts/radiant-and-conductive-heating-systems.md)
may raise eyebrows, because electric heating isn't considered
sustainable: burning fossil fuels to make electricity and then convert
it back to heat has large energy conversion losses, which can be avoided
if you heat a space directly with fossil fuels.

However, things aren't as simple as they might seem. Electric radiant
heating panels can offer energy savings even if the electricity is
generated by fossil fuels, because they are able to heat locally and
quickly. Since it takes less than five minutes for an electric radiant
heating panel to produce maximum output, it can be used only when and
where it is needed. Air heating systems, tile stoves, or radiant
building surfaces need considerably more time to bring a space to a
comfortable temperature, and therefore they have to work continuously
throughout the day (or they have to be oversized) in order to provide
instant comfort.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

How much energy can be saved depends on&mdash;among other things&mdash;the
interior volume of a space, the amount of people in it, and how
frequently the space is used

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Do the advantages of electric heating panels outweigh the disadvantages?
This depends mainly on how frequently the space is used. Their
efficiency advantage is largest for rooms that are less frequently used.
Many spaces are only used intermittently, and it's these spaces that
could benefit the most from electric radiant heating panels. On the
other hand, if electric heating panels are used continuously throughout
the day, their quick heating capacity brings no efficiency advantage and
they might end up using more energy than an air heating system. \[6\]

Open the Windows

Local heating can provide a healthier indoor climate compared to air
heating. Indoor air pollution is a growing problem for two reasons.
Firstly, people spend more and more time indoors: up to 90% of their
lives in the western world. Secondly, building materials and household
items have become increasingly polluted. Harmful chemicals can be
expelled from building materials, furniture, and household cleaning
products, while additional pollution is generated by human activities
(mainly
[cooking]({filename}/posts/thermal-efficiency-cooking-stoves.md)
and smoking), and by the intrusion of outdoor pollutants. \[7\]

Local heating is better combined with natural ventilation than air
heating. When we heat a space by air, the medium for heat storage is
also the medium for ventilation. Measures that improve the efficiency
and comfort of air heating, such as making a building air-tight, have a
negative impact on the health of the indoor environment, while measurs
that promote a healthier indoor climate, such as regularly opening the
windows, are detrimental to the efficiency and comfort of the heating
system.



Illustration by [Diego
Marmolejo](https://www.behance.net/diegomarmolejo).

With local heating, the air is not the medium for heat storage. Heat is
directly transferred to people. Every radiant or conductive heating
source also heats the air, so it will still cost energy to open the
windows and bring in fresh air. However, since local heating provides
thermal comfort at cooler air temperatures, it will cost less energy to
bring in more fresh air. It's an alternative to complex and costly
mechanical ventilation systems, which work good if they are built, used
and maintained as they should be, but can actually worsen the indoor
climate if that's not the case.

Local heating also minimizes the continuous air circulation that is
typical in air heating systems: warm air rises, cools and comes down
again, is warmed up and rises, and so on. This turbulence causes a
circulation of dust particles that can cause or aggravate allergies or
mucous membrane infections. If the air temperature is reduced, these
effects are minimized. Cooler indoor temperatures also reduce the
prevalence of house dust mites. \[3\]\[7\]

Improving Thermal Comfort

The obvious downside of local heating is that you are tied to a certain
space when you want to be comfortable. The great advantage of air
heating&mdash;at the expense of very high energy consumption&mdash;is that the
warmth is distributed uniformly across the space, at least on the
horizontal plane, so that thermal comfort is independent of your
location. However, the fact that local heating fixes you at a certain
point in space is not as disadvantageous as it might seem, and it
actually brings an important and unexpected benefit: more comfort, at
least in shared spaces.

The uniform comfort temperature prescribed by international comfort
standards&mdash;23.3ºC (74ºF) with a clothing insulation of 1 clo&mdash;is
actually aimed at people in rest (activity level of 1 "met", which
corresponds to "seated, quiet"). Using the [CBE Thermal Comfort
Tool](http://smap.cbe.berkeley.edu/comforttool), we can see that an
increase in activity has a profound effect on comfort. If the metabolism
increases from 1 to 2.2 met ("seated, heavy limb movement") or 2.7 met
("house cleaning"), the ideal comfort temperature decreases to 13ºC
(55ºF) and 9ºC (48ºF), respectively. Even a slight increase from 1 to
1.1 met ("typing") already lowers the comfort temperature from 23.3 to
22.4ºC (74 to 72ºF).

> People are different, wear different clothes, and perform different
> activities, while air heating creates a thermal environment that's for
> everyone the same

In an air-heated space with a uniform temperature of 23.3ºC, the person
sitting in the couch watching TV could be comfortable, but the person
typing might be slightly hot and the person cleaning the room or
performing an animated conversation could be sweating. In a space that
is heated by radiant and conductive heating sources, everybody can find
the thermal comfort that suits their needs best.

While this still implies that you are tied to a certain spot in order to
be comfortable if you are inactive or performing light activity, it's
very common even with air heating to be in a specific location for
extended periods: on the couch, at a desk, at the kitchen table. There
are many places in a room where we are never at rest, and so there is no
need to heat them to the same temperature.


modern "kotatsu", a heated table from Japan, using an electric heater
instead of glowing fuel. Source:
[Rakuten](http://item.rakuten.co.jp/auc-gekiyasu/cc316d/).

People not only differ in their activities, but also in their clothing
and personality. When performing similar activities and wearing similar
clothes, the difference in neutral temperature between individuals can
still be as high as 5ºC. \[8\]\[9\] In an air-heated space, these people
are condemned to a thermal climate that's the same for everyone&mdash;a
compromise. This fact is recognised by international comfort standards,
which state that even at a "perfect" temperature a maximum of 80% of
users will be comfortable. In other words, using modern heating systems,
one in five will be too warm or too cold in the best case scenario.
\[3\]

In a space that's warmed by local heating sources, occupants that are
more active or better dressed can find a cooler spot, while those at
rest, dressed lighty or extra sensitive to cold can find a warmer
micro-climate. 100% of occupants would be able to find their ideal
environment. Personal control of the thermal environment can be
organised in two ways: everyone regulates their individual comfort by
means of a personal radiant and/or conductive heating source, or
everyone "migrates" through a space that is heated by a central radiant
heating source. Both methods can also be combined, [as it was in the old
days]({filename}/posts/heating-people-not-spaces.md).

Comfort Studies in Office Buildings

The performance of local radiant and conductive heating systems,
combined with a lower background temperature provided by air heating,
has been most extensively researched in office environments. Most of
these studies have concluded that personalised heating systems can lower
energy use and simultaneously improve thermal comfort and overall
performance. \[9\]\[10\] In offices, a multitude of people share the
same space for an extended period of time, without much or any personal
control over their thermal environment. Research has shown that about
one in two office workers is&mdash;year-round&mdash;unhappy with the thermal
climate. \[11\]

> In offices, personalized heating systems can lower energy use and
> simultaneously improve thermal comfort and working performance.

By providing each office worker with personal heating sources, everyone
can decide the thermal environment they prefer. The systems under study
are usually electric or hydronic radiant panels, which can be built into
the walls of privacy cubicles, hung at the ceiling above office workers,
or attached below the desk surface.

These can be combined with conductive heating elements embedded into
furniture. Systems that warm the hands and the feet usually work best,
because these body parts are most sensitive to cold. Because personal
heating systems can produce heat very quickly, they can be turned off
automatically when the office worker leaves the desk, using energy only
when it's necessary.



Illustration by [Diego
Marmolejo](https://www.behance.net/diegomarmolejo).

Of course, to be advantageous, the energy use of the personal heating
sources should be smaller than the energy saved by turning down the
thermostat a few degrees. Otherwise, thermal comfort might improve
comfort but energy savings won't materialise. This can happen when the
air heating system has too little capacity (in which case extra energy
use is expected), but it's also possible that people start dressing more
lightly because of personal energy sources, which can lead to more
energy consumption.

Adaptive Thermal Comfort

Restoring the old concept of "heating people, not places" requires a new
definition of thermal comfort. For all its advantages, the use of local
heating systems doesn't comply with international comfort standards,
because the average temperature in the room will not obtain the minimum
recommended values. As discussed in a [previous
article]({filename}/posts/circulating-fans-air-conditioning.md),
the same goes for cooling: a space that is cooled by local cooling
systems (such as fans) exceeds the maximal temperature values for summer
comfort.

Modern comfort standards don't recognise the freedom to actively move
throughout a space in search of thermal comfort, although this could
have profound consequences for energy use while maintaining thermal
comfort, write Humphreys and two of his colleagues in "Adaptive Thermal
Comfort: Principles and Practice". \[4\] We have been conditioned by
ideas that comfort implies a steady temperature throughout a space, but
this is an intrinsic feature of modern air heating and cooling systems,
not a condition for feeling comfortable.

> A steady temperature throughout a space is an intrinsic feature of
> modern air heating and cooling systems, not a condition for feeling
> comfortable.

In reality, we constantly adapt ourselves to the thermal environment,
not only by moving between different thermal environments, but also by
changing clothes or our activities, by opening or closing windows or
curtains, by consuming hot or cold drinks, by changing posture, and so
on. Field studies have demonstrated that people can be comfortable in
much wider temperature ranges than those prescribed by comfort standards
if they have the freedom to react to changing conditions. This "Adaptive
Thermal Comfort" model, which leans heavily on local heating/cooling
sources and clothing insulation, is at odds with the established comfort
standards, which are based on research in climate chambers. \[4\]

Climate chambers are special laboratories in which the temperature,
humidity and air speed are precisely controlled, while the subjects'
thermal comfort is measured. All subjects are made to perform the same
task, wearing the same clothes, and sitting in a fixed location. They
can't change clothes or activity or move closer to a heating or cooling
source, while these actions could have large consequences for their
thermal comfort. Comfort standards&mdash;which are the guidelines for most
architects and engineers&mdash;treat us as if we are passive beings living
in climate chambers. We have come to believe that we are.

[Kris De Decker](http://www.krisdedecker.org) (edited by [Deva
Lee](http://www.theculturemuncher.com))

![](https://www.paypalobjects.com/en_US/i/scr/pixel.gif){width="1"
height="1"}----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Notes:

\[1\] [Stralingsverwarming: Gezonde Warmte met Minder
Energie](http://www.eburon.nl/stralingsverwarming), Kris De Decker, 2015

\[2\] [Proof that the greenest building is the one already standing
released in new report from Preservation Green
Lab](http://www.treehugger.com/green-architecture/proof-greenest-building-one-already-standing-released-new-report-preservation-green-lab.html),
Lloyd Alter, 2012.

\[3\] [Keeping Warm in a Cooler House. Creating Comfort with Background
Heating and Local Supplementary
Warmth](http://www.historic-scotland.gov.uk/technicalpaper14.pdf) (PDF).
Historical Scotland Technical Paper 14, Michael Humphreys, Historic
Scotland, 2011

\[4\] [Adaptive Thermal Comfort: Principles and
Practice](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0415691591/ref=as_li_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0415691591&linkCode=as2&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkId=ALEQFIDNAT6TBHC5)![](http://ir-na.amazon-adsystem.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=as2&o=1&a=0415691591){width="1"
height="1"}, Fergus Nicol, Michael Humphreys & Susan Roaf, 2012

\[5\] [Energy-efficient comfort with a heated/cooled
chair](https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6wz926bx), Center for the Built
Environment, UC Berkeley, Wilmer Pasut, 2014

\[6\] [Beispielhafte Vergleichsmessung zwischen
Infrarothstrahlungsheizung und Gasheizung im
Altbaubereich](http://www-user.rhrk.uni-kl.de/~kosack/forschung/?INFRAROT-STRAHLUNGSHEIZUNG),
Peter Kosack, TU Kaiserslautern, 2009

\[7\] [Indoor
Pollutants](http://www.nap.edu/openbook.php?record_id=1711), Committee
on Indoor Pollutants, National Research Council, 1981

\[8\] Individual control at each workplace: the means and the potential
benefits, David Wyon, in "Creating the productive workplace", Derek
Croome, 2000

\[9\] [Persoonlijke beïnvloeding als sleutel tot een A+
klimaat](http://www.binnenmilieu.nl/v2/media/file/TVVL%20april%202010%20persoonlijke%20beinvloeding%20voor%20A+%20klimaat.pdf)
(PDF), Atze Boerstra, in TVVL Magazine, 04, 2010

\[10\] [Comfort, perceived air quality, and work performance in a
low-power task-ambient conditioning
system](http://www.cbe.berkeley.edu/research/pdf_files/Zhang2008SR-TAC.pdf)
(PDF), Hui Zhang et al., Center for the Built Environment, 2008

\[11\] [Air quality and thermal comfort in office buildings: results of
a large indoor environmental quality
survey](http://cbe.berkeley.edu/research/pdf_files/Huizenga_HB2006.pdf)
(PDF), in "Proceedings of healthy buildings 2006, Lisbon, Vol.III,
393-397

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Related Articles:

-   [Restoring the Old Way of Warming: Heating People, not
    Places]({filename}/posts/heating-people-not-spaces.md)
-   [Radiant and Conductive Heating
    Systems]({filename}/posts/radiant-and-conductive-heating-systems.md)
-   [The Revenge of the Ceiling
    Fan]({filename}/posts/circulating-fans-air-conditioning.md)
-   [Insulation: First the Body, then the
    Home]({filename}/posts/body-insulation-thermal-underwear.md)
-   [Heat your Clothes, not your
    House]({filename}/posts/heat-your-clothes-not-your-house.md)
-   [The Solar Envelope: How to Heat and Cool Cities without Fossil
    Fuels]({filename}/posts/solar-oriented-cities-1-the-solar-envelope.md)
-   [Don't Heat your Room with Tea
    Candles](http://www.notechmagazine.com/2014/11/dont-heat-your-room-with-tea-candles.html)

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
