Title: Modular Cargo Cycles
Date: 2014-05-05 16:13
Author: Kris De Decker
Category: Low-tech Solutions
Slug: modular-cargo-cycles
Status: published



Following more than two years of research and development, the Danish
art collective [N55](http://www.n55.dk/) has presented its [modular
cargo cycles](http://www.xyzcargo.com/): the two-wheeled XYZ Cargo Bike
(90 kg loading capacity) and the three-wheeled XYZ Cargo Trike (150 kg
loading capacity). The assembled versions sell online for about half the
price of similar cargo cycles on the market. Because their design is
open and modular, the XYZ Cargo Cycles are even cheaper to build
yourself, and easy to customize.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  

  

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Article also available in
[French](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/des-cycles-utilitaires-modulaires.html).
Picture: The modular XYZ Cargo Trike by N55.

[XYZ Cargo](http://www.xyzcargo.com/) brings together two technologies
that have been praised at Low-tech Magazine: open modular hardware and
cargo cycles. Modular consumer products, whose parts and components
could be re-used for the design of other products, would bring important
benefits in terms of sustainability, while they would also [save
consumers money, speed up innovation, and take manufacturing out of the
hands of
multinationals](http://http//lowtechmagazine.com/2012/12/how-to-make-everything-ourselves-open-modular-hardware.html).

Cargo cycles, on the other hand, could handle an important part of cargo
traffic in cities, paving the way towards sustainable and free-flowing
traffic, while at the same time offering important [economic advantages
to tradesmen, artisans and service
providers]({filename}/posts/jobs-of-the-future-cargo-cyclist.md).
The open modular cargo cycles built by N55 in collaboration with
designer/artist Till Wolfer combine all those benefits.

Innovation

The market for cargo bikes is booming. This was the overall feeling at
the [International Cargo Bike
Festival](http://www.cargobikefestival.com/) in Nijmegen (the
Netherlands) and at the [Berliner
Fahrradschau](http://www.berlinerfahrradschau.de/) in Germany this
spring. The sales figures are skyrocketing and there is plenty of
innovation going on.

A growing number of vehicles features an auxiliary electric motor, while
many cargo trikes are now available with tilting mechanisms for fast
cornering. Another innovation concerns the steering mechanism; several
manufacturers have presented systems that obviate the need for a
conventional fork, allowing for better control and increased cargo
space.



The [Elian Cargo
Bike](http://www.eliancycles.com/builds/elians-cargo-bike), with
steering in the front hub.

Unfortunately, these innovative vehicles often come with a hefty price
tag. The prettiest cargo cycles such as the [Elian Cargo
Bike](http://www.eliancycles.com/builds/elians-cargo-bike) (a racing
version of a cargo bike with steering in the front hub), or the
electrically assisted [Butchers & Bicycles
MK1](http://www.butchersandbicycles.com/) (with tilting mechanism) set
you back at least four or five thousand euro (\$ 5000 - \$ 7000),
without any options.

These cycles are well worth the money, but they are obviously not within
reach of everybody. Less fancy cargo cycles still have minimum prices of
around 2,500 euro (\$ 3,500).

Modular Cargo Cycles

This is why the affordable [XYZ Cargo Cycles](http://www.xyzcargo.com/)
deserve our special attention. The assembled versions of the XYZ Cargo
Bike and XYZ Cargo Trike sell online for 1,350 euro and 1,600 euro,
respectively (\$ 1900 - \$ 2,220), which is about half the price of
similar cargo cycles on the market. However, the cycles are not less
interesting or innovative, on the contrary. For example, they feature a
revolutionary steering mechanism inspired by motorcycles, which
increases the cargo space considerably.

The low price is largely due to the modular nature of the vehicles. The
XYZ Cargo Cycles are not built in a traditional way. Unlike the singular
load-bearing tube seen in conventional bike structures, the main
structure is an orthogonal
[spaceframe](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Space_frame) of standard
aluminum square tubes of varying lengths in which holes are drilled.

The spaceframe is based on [XYZ
Nodes](http://www.n55.dk/MANUALS/XYZNODES/xyznodes.html), which is a
modular construction system developed by N55. It builds upon an old,
well-known principle of joining timber or steel struts together.
Structurally, the connection system shares similarities with lashed
joints used for example in the traditional wooden frames seen in inuit
kayaks, or with rivet constructions such as airplane hulls or old ship
hulls.







The XYZ Cargo Bike.

It's a simple method of building light-weight things from durable
materials in a low-cost way. XYZ Nodes forms rigid corners that become
flexible when exposed to forces that would break other joining methods
like a welded joint. The consequence is that it allows for rigid frames
relying on corner connections that are not necessarily triangulated for
greater strength, hereby leaving a free open space inside the frame.
This made it possible to place gear wheels and chains within the frame,
away from the users.

Easy to Build and Customize

The cargo cycles are open source concepts which you can modify yourself.
The designs&mdash;including any new construction principle used in the
system&mdash;and the XYZ construction and connection principle are open
source provided under the rules of Creative Commons [CC BY-NC-SA
3.0](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/). Users are free
to use available designs, as long as it is for non-commercial purposes
and any use of the work includes proper credits.

This means that you can obtain the cycles even cheaper if you buy
standard aluminium tubes and cycle parts, available all over the world,
and build the cycle yourself. The frame is assembled using stainless
steel bolts, washers and nuts. The assembling requires only simple
hand-held, non-specialized tools, like a drill and a metal saw. No
welding process is required.

Like all modular systems, XYZ nodes enable people to build things based
on the principle of a few different parts repeatedly used to create an
overall structure, [similar to construction sets like Lego, Meccano and
Erector]({filename}/posts/how-to-make-everything-ourselves-open-modular-hardware.md).
Because of the open and modular design, the XYZ Cargo Cycles are easy to
customize and to rebuild. For example, a cover or a body to improve wind
resistance and protect from the weather can be applied&mdash;turning the
cargo cycle into a
[velomobile](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/velomobiles).





The modular XYZ Cargo Trike.

Several modules have been developed that can be put on top of the XYZ
Cargo Trike to transform its functionality: a roof and table module, a
passenger seat module, a kitchen module with table, roof and sink, and a
platform module. The latter transforms the cargo cycle into a 1.5 x 3 m
large movable space, while from a legal point of view remaining a
bicycle. The platform module was used to create a [ParkCycle
Swarm](http://n55.dk/MANUALS/PARKCYCLESWARM/PARKCYCLESWARM.html), which
empowers people to build an instant public park whenever and wherever
they want to.

N55 is not a commercial enterprise, but a non-profit organization that
aims to restore local production in a socially just and environmentally
sustainable way. This is another reason for the modest prices. All the
money earned with the sale of cycles will be invested in the further
development of the technology. N55 gives away the building plans and
offers the assembled bikes for a low price because they want to see as
many of them on the road.

Available Models and Free Plans

The [freshly opened webshop of XYZ Cargo](http://www.xyzcargo.com/)
offers two models for sale. The XYZ Cargo Bike weighs 26 kg and measures
245 x 56 x 105 cm (LxWxH), while the XYZ Cargo Trike weighs 34 kg and
measures 208 x 94 x 105 cm (LxWxH). The cargo box of the Trike measures
55 x 80 cm and the plating is made of transparant Polycarbonate sheets.
Both cargo models can be equipped with electric hub motors and
batteries.



Two other vehicles have been produced, the XYZ One Seater (20 kg) and
the XYZ Two Seater (34 kg). These pedal powered vehicles (with or
without electric assist motor) are recumbent tricycles with one or two
seats. The Two Seater can also be equipped with a cargo platform instead
of a second seat. These cycles are not for sale, but the open designs
are online at N55's website. The XYZ One Seater's construction drawings
are available for download
[here](http://www.n55.dk/MANUALS/SPACEFRAMEVEHICLES/DIY.pdf) and those
for the XYZ Two Seater are
[here](http://www.n55.dk/MANUALS/SPACEFRAMEVEHICLES/DIY.pdf).

See and read more: [XYZ Cargo](http://www.xyzcargo.com/) / [XYZ
Spaceframe
Vehicles](http://www.n55.dk/MANUALS/SPACEFRAMEVEHICLES/spaceframevehicles.html)
/ [N55](http://www.n55.dk/). And don't miss the [Eight-Wheeler Cargo
Cycle](http://notechmagazine.com/2014/04/eight-wheeler-cargo-cycle.html),
which got most of the attention at the Cargo Bike events.

Kris De Decker & Jo van Bostraeten

Related Articles:

-   [How to Make Everything Ourselves: Open Modular
    Hardware]({filename}/posts/how-to-make-everything-ourselves-open-modular-hardware.md)
-   [Cargo Cyclists Replace Truck Drivers on European City
    Streets]({filename}/posts/jobs-of-the-future-cargo-cyclist.md)
-   [Electric Velomobiles: as Fast and Comfortable as Automobiles, but
    80 Times More
    Efficient]({filename}/posts/electric-velomobiles.md)
-   [Pedal Powered Farms and Factories: the Forgotten Future of the
    Stationary
    Bicycle]({filename}/posts/pedal-powered-farms-and-factories.md)

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
