Title: Pedal powered farms and factories: the forgotten future of the stationary bicycle
Date: 2011-05-25 14:38
Author: Kris De Decker
Category: Low-tech Solutions
Tags: bicycle machine, pedal power, pedal powered machine, stationary bicycle
Slug: pedal-powered-farms-and-factories
Status: published



If we boost the research on pedal powered technology - trying to make up
for seven decades of lost opportunities - and steer it in the right
direction, pedals and cranks could make an important contribution to
running a post-carbon society that maintains many of the comforts of a
modern life. The possibilities of pedal power largely exceed the use of
the bicycle.



One way to solve the [large energy losses of pedal power
generators]({filename}/posts/bike-powered-electricity-generators.md)
is not to produce electricity at all but power devices mechanically,
whenever possible. Another way - the only way for devices that cannot be
powered via a direct mechanical connection because they do not rely on
rotary motion - is to make the generation of electricity more efficient.
This can be done by building a pedal powered generator from scratch
instead of using a road bicycle, or by ditching one or several
electronic components in the power transmission chain. All approaches
can be combined, resulting in a pedal power unit that can power a
multitude of mechanical devices and generate electricity comparatively
efficiently.

Direct Mechanical Power Transmission


machines could be powered by a direct mechanical connection, though it
generally means adapting the device so that it can work independently of
electricity. However, stationary pedal machines with direct mechanical
power transmission - [although they were common in the old
days]({filename}/posts/history-of-pedal-powered-machines.md)
- are not available commercially in the western world.

The only exception seems to be the [Fender
Blender](http://bikeblender.com/products/), a pedal powered machine used
to make smoothies (picture on the right). However, old school bicycle
machines are now being designed both by amateurs in the western world
and non-profit organisations in the developing world.

In Guatemala, [Mayapedal](http://www.mayapedal.org/) has been building
some 2,000 [pedal powered
machines](http://www.mayapedal.org/machines.html) from old bicycle parts
since 2001. To date, the NGO has built pedal powered water pumps,
grinders, threshers, tile makers, nut shellers, washing machines and
blenders. These cost only \$40 to \$250 to make. Their contraptions have
become more sophisticated and even cheaper to build over time, evolving
from adapted bicycles to pedal powered machines built from scratch which
incorporate a flywheel, and are capable of driving different types of
appliances.

Another example is the [VitaGoat Cycle
Grinder](http://www.malnutrition.org/vitagoat.php) developed by the
Canadian NGO [Malnutrition Matters](http://www.malnutrition.org/). The
pedal powered grinder forms part of a complete food processing system
which is delivered to developing countries in Asia and Africa.
[Chocosol](http://chocosol.posterous.com/) teaches local people in
Mexico to build their own pedal powered cacao bean grinders and the
Canadian promoters also use the technology in their shop in Toronto. The
[Full Belly Project](http://www.thefullbellyproject.org/Home.aspx)
designs [human powered nut
shellers](http://www.instructables.com/id/Universal-Nut-Sheller/step48/Pedal-Powered-Agricultural-Center-Coming-Soon-to-/)
for farmers in Africa.


Then there are the many contraptions built by individuals too: the
[pedal powered](http://www.cyclean.biz/mainmenu.html) [washing
machines](http://homelessdave.com/hdwashingman.htm) by Alex Gadsden and
Homeless Dave, the [pedal powered soap
blender](http://www.justsoap.com/Bicycle.htm) by Frederick Breeden, or
the [pedal powered apple
grinder](http://fiveislandsorchard.wordpress.com/category/cider-equipment/)
by Ben Polito. Similar machines have also been built outside the US.
Some have concentrated on restoring and putting to use antique machines,
like [Blue Ox Millworks](http://www.blueoxmill.com/).

One obvious disadvantage of designing a pedal powered machine for every
application in the household, farm or workshop is that you need a lot of
space. Furthermore, designing a pedal power unit for every tool might
become labour-intensive, costly and energy-intensive.

This is not as much of a problem in cases of small-scale industrial use,
where few machines are required in order to manufacture a product. A
good example of this is the pedal powered soap blender mentioned above.
For this reason, a pedal powered blender could be a realistic option for
small businesses, such as a smoothie bar. However, when more tools are
needed and space is restricted, as is often the case, we need to find
ways to get around this problem. One solution is to use pedal power to
generate electricity which can then be used to power different devices.
However, this approach is highly inefficient with energy losses of up to
more than 70 percent and should be avoided whenever a device can be
powered in a mechanical way.



The design of universal pedal powered units with direct mechanical
transmission was extensively researched in the 1970s



Another solution is to design a universal pedal power unit with direct
mechanical transmission that can be used to operate a large variety of
different tools and devices (including a generator). This method, which
solves both the space and inefficiency problem, was extensively
researched in the 1970s.


Multi-purpose Pedal Powered Machines

Universal pedal powered machines did not exist at the turn of the
twentieth century, although some combined a few functions (both sawing
and drilling, for instance). At least five interesting inventions were
designed and built in the 1970s: the Energy Cycle (by Dirk Ott), the
Dynapod (by Alex Weir), the Human Powered Flywheel Motor (by JP Modak),
the Pedal Power Unit (by David Weightman) and the Dual-Purpose Bicycle
(by Job Ebenezer). All these concepts are also of interest for the
construction of single-purpose pedal power units.

The Dynapod

After experimenting with single-purpose pedal powered machines in
several countries in Africa, British engineer Alex Weir (who is also the
promoter of this [online low-tech
database]({filename}/posts/how-to-make-everything-yourself-online-lowtech-resources.md))
built a multi-purpose
'[Dynapod](http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PNAAN161.pdf)' (the name
stemming from the Greek words for 'power' and 'foot') in Tanzania in the
early 1970s. The power module, based on a 1968 concept by Stuart Wilson
of Oxford University, came in a one-man and two-man version. The tandem
unit doubled the power output, and at the same time evened out the power
flow, with both sets of pedals placed out of phase.


Dynapod was made using a custom-built frame. Apart from pedals, cranks
and chain drives, the machine shared nothing with a bicycle. The first
designs used wooden frames, while later versions were based on a steel
frame. For a flywheel, Weir used an old bicycle wheel filled with
cement. The cost of the wooden frame unit (in 1980) was \$40 to \$100,
materials and labour included.

The Dynapod could drive pumps, corn grinders, winnowing machines, forge
blowers, grinding machines, drilling machines, potter's wheels, paint
sprayers, crop dusting equipment, cassave graters, coffee pulpers, grain
hullers, fibre decorticators, threshers, balers, band saws, tire pumps
and sewing machines. It could also be used to generate electricity.



Apart from pedals, cranks and chain drives, these human powered machines
share nothing with a bicycle



To allow the operation of such a wide diversity of appliances, the
Dynapod was equipped with multiple drives. It could be operated with a
direct drive having a ratio of 1:1 (when a lot of torque was needed at a
slow speed), a chain drive with a ratio of up to 3:1 (a compromise
between torque and speed for operating grinders, threshers, etc.) or a
belt drive with a ratio of up to 10:1 (for electrical generation, a
winnowing fan, and other uses where high speeds were required). The
machine was easily adapted from one drive to another. Multiple drives on
pedal powered machines were not a novelty - some earlier pedal powered
machines had them too.


The Energy Cycle

Rodale Press, the publisher of the 1977 book '[Pedal Power in Work,
Leisure and
Transportation](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0878571787/ref=as_li_tf_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=217145&creative=399349&creativeASIN=0878571787)'
also had a research team - Rodale's Research and Development Department.
Together with inventor Dick Ott they conceived their version of a
universal pedal power unit, the 'Energy Cycle'.

Just like the Dynapod, it was built from scratch and could accommodate a
large number of detachable tools. These included kitchen aids (such as
an egg beater, can opener, nut chopper, food grinder, fish skinner, meat
and cheese slicer and a cherry pitter), farm machinery (including an
irrigation water pump, feather plucker, potato digger, corn sheller,
grain cleaner, rice polisher and oatmeal roller) and more general tools
(like a wheel grinder, stone polisher, drill, wood carver and battery
charger).

Several improved prototypes were built, first of iron, and then of
steel. For the first upgrade of the design, a large work table was added
to the unit which enabled the operator to perform numerous tasks without
leaving his seat. Later versions were equipped with a flywheel.
Experiments showed that the unit offered considerable benefits in
comparison with hand powered machines or small horse power motors and
engines. The main challenge remains in finding a universal means of
attaching each implement to the Energy Cycle - which should be easily
overcome if serious industrial research is dedicated to it.


Pedal Powered Winch: Substituting a Farm Horse or Tractor

Both the Dynapod and the Energy Cycle could also double up as a pedal
powered winch, offering a whole new array of possibilities. A winch is
useful for pulling, excavating, load lifting, or snow plowing. In
agriculture, a winch can be utilized for cable-cultivation, a principle
in which the motive power for plowing (or harrowing, cultivating,
seeding and hay raking) is stationary and only the tool (attached to a
multifunctional mobile tool carrier) moves across the field along a
cable.

This agricultural method is based on steam cable plowing, which was the
only mechanized method of agriculture for almost one hundred years.
Cable-cultivation brings considerable savings in energy, because the
motive power - be it human, animal or mechanical - does not have to
waste power in moving itself over the soil. Additional advantages are
the avoidance of soil compaction, a notable drawback of using a tractor,
and the possibility to work on waterlogged ground and steep slopes.



Cable-cultivation is a principle in which the motive power for plowing
(or harrowing, cultivating, seeding and hay raking) is stationary and
only the tool moves across the field along a cable.




a field left fallow for a year, the Energy Cycle pulled a plough through
the grass and weed covered soil, successfully substituting the work of a
[farm
horse]({filename}/posts/horses-agricult.md) or
tractor. One person pedalled the winch that drew the plough through the
soil while another guided it. It took the two presons about an hour to
plow 1,500 square feet. The only difficulty was that the winch had the
tendency to break or bend ordinary hand tools. Because of this problem,
and because the Energy Cycle held so much promise as a garden and farm
tool, the research team built a specialized pedal powered winch and
special tools to be used with it.

This more compact unit - basically two pedals separated by a spool
mounted on bearings, built into a frame which also supports the seat -
was capable of pulling over 1000 lbs (453 kg) with average pedalling
effort, amplifying human power by almost ten times. Together with a
specially designed frame that could hold different attachments, it was
successfully used for pulling, snow plowing, dislodging small stumps and
pulling seeders, harrows and hay rakes.

Low gears were used for jobs requiring a slow, powerful pull, such as
plowing through heavy soil. Second or high gears were used for easier
jobs such as harrowing or cultivating. In order to be moved sideways so
as to easily cultivate one row after the other, a pedal powered winch
can be mounted on skids. The weight of the operator provides sufficient
anchorage while in use.


Human Powered Flywheel Motor

An interesting variation on the multi-purpose pedal powered machine is
the [Human Powered Flywheel
Motor](http://www.iftomm.org/iftomm/proceedings/proceedings_WorldCongress/WorldCongress07/articles/sessions/papers/A983.pdf)
(pdf) designed by J.P. Modak, an emeritus engineering professor from
India. The remarkable feature of Modak's machine - which has been
developed since 1979 - is that it can deliver much more power than the
human who operates it.



The human powered flywheel motor can deliver much more power than the
person who operates it



The machine system uses human energy and stores it in a flywheel at an
energy-input rate convenient to the pedaller. After storing the maximum
possible energy in the flywheel (pedalling time is 1 to 2 minutes), it
is made available for the actuation of the process unit by the rapid
release of the stored kinetic energy in the flywheel via a suitable
clutch. The concept only works when the process can be of intermittent
nature without affecting the end product.


The human powered flywheel motor was initially developed for the making
of bricks for a housing authority in Mumbai, India. Since then, it has
been successfully used for several rural-based production activities
such as water lifting, algae formation processing, wood turning,
winnowing, wood strip cutting, electricity generation and the operation
of a smiths hammer. Processes needing up to 6 HP could be energised by
the machine concept (although only one third of this has been achieved
to date). This would be about 20 to 60 times more than what an average
human can sustain either momentarily (300 watts) or for long periods
(100 watts).


The energy unit consists of an existing bicycle frame which provides a
seat and handle, a pair of speed-increasing gears, and a flywheel of
about one metre in diameter. The transmission consists of a spiral
clutch and a torque-amplification gear pair. For brick manufacturing in
particular, the process unit consists of an auger, cone and die,
conventionally used for motorized brick-extruders for the manufacture of
clay bricks.

Combining Stationary and Mobile Pedal Power

A very different approach to multi-purpose pedal powered machines was
followed by David Weightman. His concept (and prototype) was inspired by
the Dynapod, but Weightman added one feature: the machine should still
be usable for transportation. His [Pedal Power
Unit](http://www.cd3wd.com/cd3wd_40/JF/JF_VE/SMALL/19-436.pdf) (PPU) was
comprised of a bicycle wheel in forks fitted to a frame with a saddle.
The unit could then be used independently to drive machinery via a power
takeoff but could also be connected to a two-wheel chassis to form a
load-carrying tricycle. Furthermore, the unit could be connected in
series with other units for machine applications requiring more power.
Weightman justified his concept by emphasising the close link between
transport and machine use in agricultural and industrial production:

"In a typical agricultural growing cycle, seed and fertilizer are
transported to the field, crops are grown and then processed by
machinery, and then produce is transported to the market. Similar
patterns can be seen in construction and small scale industrial
production. The use of a pedal power unit in this dual purpose role is
exactly analagous to the use of tractors in European agriculture as
power sources and transport devices. The PPU is equally suitable as the
Dynapod when operating a number of machines but is more economically
feasible for an individual farmer due to its capability as a transport
device."



The Dual-Purpose Bicycle looks very similar to the electricity
generators which are sold today, though it is aimed at mechanically
driving multiple machines and producing electricity



Job Ebenezer from the MGO '[Technology for the
Poor](http://www.technologyforthepoor.com/)' further developed this
design, simplifying it greatly by substituting the tricycle for a
bicycle. At first sight, his '[Dual-Purpose
Bicycle](http://www.technologyforthepoor.com/PedalPowerReport/PedalPowerReport.htm)'
looks very similar to the electricity generating units which are sold
today, though it is aimed at mechanically driving multiple machines and
producing electricity.


The ingenious design, primarily for agricultural use, consists of a very
small flywheel attached to a standard bicycle, which permits its use as
a pedal-powered machine that can be utilized to power numerous
small-scale mechanical devices such as grain threshers, grinders,
winnowers, peanut shellers, corn shellers, circular saws, wood working
lathes, water pumps, electrical generators, and a variety of small
tools.

The contraption can be converted from the transportation mode to pedal
power mode in a matter of minutes. The broad stand, which provides
stability during power production, can be flipped upward during the
transport mode and doubles up as a freight carrier. The power-generating
device remains attached to the bicycle in transportation mode, so that
it can be easily transported and used immediately. Of course, this pedal
power unit is a compromise, but it is an interesting one.


to modern concepts, it has a small flywheel and it does not use a
friction drive because of its low efficiency. During the prime-mover
mode, the bike's regular chain is slipped off of the chain-wheel, and a
custom chain to the power take-off mechanism is slipped on. Changing
gear ratios is as simple as it is on a road bike. For driving more
powerful devices, a larger flywheel can be placed between the power
module and the process unit.

Treadles

The many advantages of pedal powered machines don't make hand cranks or
treadles obsolete. Not all devices need the extra torque of pedal power.
Hand cranks and treadles can be a better option if power requirements
are low or if power is only needed over a short period. A hand cranked
device is much more compact than a pedal powered device. If hand control
is required while operating low power equipment, treadles remain the
best choice because they offer the operator more freedom of movement
than pedals.

Of course, both mechanisms can also benefit from advantages in modern
design and materials - including speed or torque increasing gears. A
good example is the [R2B2 kitchen
unit](http://www.areyouwheel.com/areyouwheel.com/Areyouwheel.com.html)
by German designer [Christoph
Thetard](http://www.christoph-thetard.de/christoph-thetard.de/start_BLog-1-engl_2.html)
(which is not for sale, unfortunately). It combines three kitchen
appliances with a central driving unit. The heart of the unit is a
treadle powered flywheel which works as an short-term energy storage (as
in the Human Powered Flywheel Motor), capable of delivering up to 350
watts (of mechanical power) to the appliances. Similar to late 19th
century machines, and contrary to today's kitchen devices, it is built
to last.

Lowering the Costs and Energy Losses of Pedal Powered Electricity

Many modern machines and devices cannot be powered directly by
mechanical energy. This is especially true for electronic equipment
(such as computers, cell phones, televisions, routers, etc.) but it is
also true for refrigerators and light bulbs. If we want to keep these
modern comforts, we have to find a way to make pedal powered electricity
more efficient. There are several ways to do this.

1\. Build a Generator from Scratch

Because it has few disadvantages, the best way to start is to build a
pedal generator from scratch instead of using a bicycle on a training
stand. This allows you to replace the friction drive by a more efficient
drive, like a chain drive, and to add a flywheel.


Steel flywheels can be found on the most expensive exercise bicycles.
However, a flywheel can also be cheap, low-tech and just as efficient
when you are using a bicycle wheel filled with concrete or a wooden
tabletop. The latter is used by the '[Pedal Powered Prime
Mover](http://www.los-gatos.ca.us/davidbu/pedgen.html)' (PPPM) made by
David Butcher, which is one of the few good examples of a pedal powered
electricity generator built from scratch (the plans sell for \$50 and
the cost for the DIY version is estimated at \$230). It consists of a
steel frame made of steel shelving supports.

Although the PPPM uses a friction drive, it is a rather efficient one
because it is basically powered by a wooden tyre - the flywheel. Since
higher tyre pressure increases the efficiency of a friction drive, a
wooden wheel can be considered a bicycle wheel with optimal tyre
pressure. Furthermore, the flywheel is powered directly by the pedals,
eliminating the energy loss in chains and sprockets altogether (it is a
'direct drive' in other words). The only drawback of this method is that
you can't change the gear ratio.

Butcher (who built his first machine in the seventies) claims an
improved efficiency of 25 to 50% compared to a standard bicycle on a
training stand. Interestingly, it can also power some devices via a
direct mechanical connection: a water pump, a hammer, a masonry chisel,
an air compressor and a hack saw. Building a pedal powered machine from
scratch can thus offer you the best of both worlds.

2\. Ditch the Electronics

You can go much further in order to improve the efficiency of a pedal
powered generator. In the most extreme case, you could skip the voltage
regulator, the converter and the battery, which leaves you only with the
energy loss of the generator. Or you can leave out either one of these
devices.



In the most extreme case, you could skip the voltage regulator, the
converter and the battery, which leaves you only with the energy loss of
the generator


all these actions come with a price. If you do away with the converter,
you need to replace the electrical devices you use. What you need, then,
are DC-appliances like the ones you can plug in the interior of your
car. While this can be an interesting option because of the high
efficiency loss of a converter (25%), not all appliances come in a
DC-variant (there are no DC-laptops, for
instance[\*](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2011/05/pedal-powered-farms-and-factories.html?cid=6a00e0099229e88833014e88b50ca6970d#comment-6a00e0099229e88833014e88b50ca6970d)).

If you do away with the voltage regulator - and several of the pedal
powered generators come without them - you have to carefully watch a
multimeter while pedalling to make sure that the voltage does not exceed
the capacity of the battery (or the device you are powering if you do
away with the battery too). If not, you could destroy the battery (or
the device, if you don't use a battery). A flywheel can be of great help
here, because it smooths out not only the energy input (the alternating
high and low force of a natural pedalling rhythm) but also the energy
output, keeping the voltage relatively constant.

3\. Get rid of the Battery


away with the battery, or replacing it with a much more efficient and
robust ultracapacitator, is probably the most rewarding thing you can
do, not just in terms of efficiency, but also in terms of costs,
reliability and - especially - sustainability. (Capacitators have a much
longer service life than batteries, but a much lower energy density).
However, you lose the advantage of generating energy and storing it for
later use. In this case, you would have to pedal while using the device
at the same time, as is the case with direct mechanical power
transmission.

Whether or not this is convenient is dependent on what you want to use
your generator for. If you mainly want to charge your laptop or cell
phone, not having a battery to store the electricity isn't a problem
since the devices themselves have a battery. However, if you want to
light the staircase room or power a television, desktop computer,
electric guitar or small fridge, this becomes rather awkward. If you
want to play recorded music and dance, not using a battery would also be
difficult.

4\. Build large-scale Pedal Power Plants

Improving the efficiency of pedal powered electricity generation becomes
easier as you organise it on a larger scale. In most of the arts and
education projects described earlier, like the BBC program or pedal
powered concerts, no batteries are used. The key here is that it is not
one person both generating and consuming power, but a large group of
people, of whom some are producing electricity whilst others are
consuming it.



In a similar fashion, electricity could be generated in large pedal
powered electricity plants, and then distributed to houses, shops,
public spaces and factories. This is more efficient than doing it in
each house separately because you can do away with the batteries and
still offer electricity 24 hours a day. Power plants would simply add
more pedallers when demand is high (such as during peaks hours) and send
them home when demand is low (at night, for instance).



Pedal powered electricity plants could be a valuable backup solution to
intermittent renewable energy sources



Human powered electricity plants should avoid the transmission losses of
today's extremely centralized power network. They should preferably be
located in every neighbourhood or city district. In this scenario, it
also becomes possible to do away with converters and switch the
electricity distribution system from AC to DC, since the former was only
chosen because it is more efficient to transport electricity over large
distances. Of course, this is less plausible, since it means rewiring
cities and replacing all devices.


The future of Pedal Powered Machines

If we boost the research on pedal powered technology - trying to make up
for seven decades of lost opportunities - and steer it in the right
direction, pedals and cranks could make an important contribution to
running a post-carbon society that maintains many of the comforts of a
modern life. The possibilities of pedal power therefore largely exceed
the use of the bicycle.

Pedallers could power agriculture, factories, construction, mining and
even other means of transportation than bicycles: [aerial
ropeways]({filename}/posts/aerial-ropeways-automatic-cargo-transport.md),
[cable
trains]({filename}/posts/water-powered-cable-trains.md)
and
[trolleyboats]({filename}/posts/trolley-canal-boats.md).
Pedal powered electricity plants could be a valuable backup solution to
intermittent renewable energy sources, replacing coal, gas and nuclear
as a base load power for when the sun and wind let us down. Human power
is available 24 hours per day, is not affected by changes in the
weather, is portable and can easily be stored for later use. Contrary to
wind and biomass, it is an energy source that will never be depleted,
since its potential keeps pace with population growth. Pedal power would
also aid unemployment, leave us with a fit and healthy workforce, and
produce a great deal of nice-looking bottoms.

The Limits of Pedal Power

Of course, pedal power can only make a difference if we *drastically*
reduce energy consumption. While athletes can produce a power output of
over 2,000 watts on a bicycle, they can only sustain this over a period
of a few seconds. The power that can be delivered by the average person
over a sustained period of time is much less impressive than that: 75
watts or 1 "hup". This unit of measurement (short for human power) was
proposed in 1984, and tells us that an average person can sustain one
hup for all day, 2 hups (150 watts) for roughly two hours, 3 hups (225
watts) for about 30 minutes and 4 hups (300 watts) only momentarily.



The absence of self-produced cooling winds results in possible
overheating of the body


reason not to be overly-optimistic about the energy output of stationary
pedalling is the fact that a stationary pedaller does not need to
overcome air resistance. This sounds like a good thing, because at
higher speeds a cyclist spends most of his energy compensating for air
resistance. However, air resistance also keeps the active human body
from overheating.

It was found that the power output measured by ergometers (stationary
bikes used to measure the power output of cyclists) is substantially
lower than that produced by the same persons on the road because the
absence of self-produced cooling winds, which results in possible
overheating of the body (this is also a problem with
[velomobiles]({filename}/posts/the-velomobile-high-tech-bike-or-low-tech-car.md)).
A (self-propelled) fan could keep the stationary pedaller cool, but it
is only a partial solution. As David Wilson notes in '[Bicycling
Science](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0262731541/ref=as_li_qf_sp_asin_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=217145&creative=399349&creativeASIN=0262731541)':

"The relative air flow generated by cycling is of such magnitude that it
bears little resemblance to the drafts produced by the small electric
fans often used for cooling people pedalling ergometers. At a speed of
about 9m/s about 150 watts are dissipated into the air. Even if cooling
fans of this power level were used \[negating the power production by
the pedaller, kdd\], the cooling effect would be much less than that for
the moving cyclist, because most of the fan power is dissipated as air
friction in areas other than around the subject's body."

While body heat production might provide interesting side-effects in
winter - you and even other people in a small room [would not need
heating]({filename}/posts/body-insulation-thermal-underwear.md)
- it would definitely limit the energy that can be delivered by pedal
power. Pedalling outside when it's windy may help, but this is not
always possible.


Wanted: 1.2 billion Pedallers for the UK

The main problem, however, lies in the demand for pedallers. To give you
an idea, let's see how many people would be needed in order to use pedal
power at a base load power plant. An average UK family consumes about 13
kWh of electricity per day (an American family would consume at least
twice as much). If we consider a relatively small energy loss of 25%
when converting human power to electricity, it would take 173 hours of
pedalling at 100 watts (thus over one 'hup') in order to produce 75 Wh
per hour. If we presume an electricity consumption that is evenly
distributed over the course of 16 hours and no electricity consumption
at night, this would take two shifts of ten people each pedalling
non-stop for eight hours. And this concerns only residential electricity
use.


If we consider total electricity consumption in the UK, each person
needs 15.7 kWh per day, or two teams of ten people each pedalling
non-stop for 8 hours. The UK would have to import a workforce of 1.2
billion people (a number equal to all the inhabitants of India) to pedal
its way into energy independence, and prohibit all these people from
using electricity themselves.

Here we are not even considering peaks in demand, but average
consumption. And we are talking only about electricity consumption, not
heating and transportation fuels. Of course wind and solar could help to
diminish the need for base load pedal power. But when there is no sun or
no wind, the power would have to be supplemented.

On the Other Hand/Foot

In other parts of the world, things are slightly different. If all
Nepalese people could pedal two hours per day, the country would be
entirely pedal powered, even without the support of other renewables.
Interestingly, the NGO [Ecosystems
Nepal](http://www.ecosystemsnepal.com/) distributes pedal powered
generators to Nepalese villages where they are used in a scenario
somewhat similar to the one envisioned above. A village is equipped with
one pedal power generator, which is pedalled for eight hours per day,
charging large batteries.



The main problem with our approach to pedal powered machines is that we
compare them to fossil fuel powered machines and not to the inefficient
human powered tools and machines that went before them.



This village 'power plant' is then visited by the people living in the
countryside in the surroundings of the village, who pass by once a month
or so to charge their small motorcycle batteries. Even taking into
account the considerable energy losses (in using batteries to charge
batteries) one pedal generator provides enough electricity for 200
homes. This is possible because small batteries only need to power 0.2
watt led-lamps, enough to read a book. I am afraid that even my Kindle
uses more than that, and it has no reading light.


Cranks and pedals are not a solution at all if we decide to cling to an
energy-intensive lifestyle - but then, neither is any other renewable
(or even non-renewable) energy source. The main problem with our
approach to pedal powered machines is that we compare them to fossil
fuel powered machines and not to the inefficient human powered tools and
machines that went before them. This explains why pedal power is often
laughed at in the western world but enthusiastically welcomed in the
developing world, where, for instance, methods of agriculture still rely
heavily on the use of human power using primitive tools which are
usually inefficient. This is a scenario in which light is produced by
dirty and inefficient kerosine lamps, or where there is no light at all.

Ironically, communities in the poorest countries in the world are
developing into sustainable societies independent of fossil fuels,
enjoying basic but modern comforts, while we continue to be ever more
dependent on increasingly dirty, dangerous and diminishing energy
sources.

Kris De Decker (edited by [Deva
Lee](http://www.theculturemuncher.wordpress.com/))



MORE: [THE SHORT HISTORY OF EARLY PEDAL POWERED
MACHINES]({filename}/posts/history-of-pedal-powered-machines.md)


The historical importance of pedal powered machines can be easily
overlooked by people who grew accustomed to fossil fuels and ubiquitous
electricity. It cannot be stressed enough how much of an improvement
pedal power was in the light of thousands of years of human drudgery.
Pedals and cranks make use of human power in a near-optimum way.
Historically, the motions used to harvest human muscle power used
inappropriate muscles moving against resistances which were too large at
speeds which were too low. [Read
more]({filename}/posts/history-of-pedal-powered-machines.md).


[BIKE POWERED ELECTRICITY GENERATORS ARE NOT
SUSTAINABLE]({filename}/posts/bike-powered-electricity-generators.md)


a modern stationary bicycle to produce electricity might be a great
work-out, but in many cases, it is not sustainable. While humans are
rather inefficient engines converting food into work, this is not the
problem we want to address here. People have to move in order to stay
healthy, so we might as well use that energy to operate machinery. The
trouble is that the present approach to pedal power results in highly
inefficient machines. [Read
more]({filename}/posts/bike-powered-electricity-generators.md).



MORE: [FULL PLANS FOR A PEDAL POWERED JUICE
EXTRACTOR](http://www.notechmagazine.com/2011/11/when-low-tech-goes-ikea.html)


happens when two industrial design students from Sweden end up in Kenya
creating a pedal powered machine for small-scale farmers who are often
illiterate and speak more than 60 languages? You get a do-it-yourself
design that seems to have come out of the IKEA factories - pictoral
manuals included.



[COULD WE RUN MODERN SOCIETY ON HUMAN POWER
ALONE]({filename}/posts/could-we-run-modern-society-on-human-power-alone.md)?



The [Human Power Plant](http://www.humanpowerplant.be) project
investigates the possibilities of human energy production in a modern
society. It plans to convert a 22-floor building on the campus of
Utrecht University into an entirely human powered student community.
With a combination of low-tech solutions, lifestyle changes, and some
exercise, it demonstrates that 750 students can live a fossil fuel free
life on campus.



Sources (in order of importance)

-   "[Pedal Power in Work, Leisure and
    Transportation](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0878571787/ref=as_li_tf_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=217145&creative=399349&creativeASIN=0878571787)",
    edited by James McCullagh, Rodale Press, 1977. Still the best
    resource on pedal powered machines.
-   "[The Human-Powered Home: Choosing Muscles Over
    Motors](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0865716013/ref=as_li_qf_sp_asin_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=217145&creative=399349&creativeASIN=0865716013)![](http://www.assoc-amazon.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=as2&o=1&a=0865716013&camp=217145&creative=399349){width="1"
    height="1"}", Tamara Dean, New Society Publishers, 2008. Very good
    book on human powered machines, both hand and foot powered. Includes
    half a dozen plans to convert bicycles into stationary pedal powered
    machines.
-   "[Bicycling
    Science](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0262731541/ref=as_li_qf_sp_asin_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=217145&creative=399349&creativeASIN=0262731541)![](http://www.assoc-amazon.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=as2&o=1&a=0262731541&camp=217145&creative=399349){width="1"
    height="1"}", Third Edition, David Gordon Wilson, 2004
-   "[The Dynapod: a pedal power
    unit](http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PNAAN161.pdf)" (pdf), Alex
    Weir, 1980. More
    [here](http://www24.brinkster.com/alexweir/thresher/default.htm).
-   "[The use of pedal power for agriculture and transport in developing
    countries](http://www.cd3wd.com/cd3wd_40/JF/JF_VE/SMALL/19-436.pdf)"
    (pdf), David Weightman, Lanchester Polytechnic, 1976
-   "[Design of a human-powered utility vehicle for developing
    communities](http://etd.ohiolink.edu/send-pdf.cgi/Cyders%20Timothy%20J.pdf?acc_num=ohiou1227199047)",
    Timothy J. Cyders, 2008
-   "[Supplement, Energy for rural
    development](http://books.google.com/books?id=TnwrAAAAYAAJ&printsec=frontcover&dq=Supplement,+energy+for+rural+development:+renewable+resources+and&hl=nl&ei=DnOrTeePBoTEsgaErZWcCA&sa=X&oi=book_result&ct=result&resnum=1&ved=0CDEQ6AEwAA#v=onepage&q&f=false)",
    National Research Council, 1981
-   "[Tales from the Blue
    Ox](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/1931626162/ref=as_li_qf_sp_asin_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=217145&creative=399349&creativeASIN=1931626162)![](http://www.assoc-amazon.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=as2&o=1&a=1931626162&camp=217145&creative=399349){width="1"
    height="1"} ", Dan Brett, 2003
-   "[Bicycles and
    tricycles](http://www.notechmagazine.com/2010/10/bicycles-tricycles-an-elementary-treatise-on-their-design-and-construction-1896.html)",
    Archibald Sharp, 1896
-   "[In search of the massless
    flywheel](http://www.ihpva.org/HParchive/PDF/31-v9n3-1991.pdf)"
    (pdf), John S. Allen, Human Power (Fall/Winter 1991-1992)
-   "[Design and development of a human-powered machine for the
    manufacture of lime-flyash-sand
    bricks](http://www.ihpva.org/HParchive/PDF/45-v13n2-1998.pdf)",
    J.P.Modak & S.D.Moghe, Human Power (Spring 1998)
-   "[Human Powered Flywheel Motor: concept, design, dynamics and
    applications](http://130.15.85.212/proceedings/proceedings_WorldCongress/WorldCongress07/articles/sessions/papers/A983.pdf)",
    J.P.Modak, 2007
-   "[Modern mechanism: exhibiting the latest progress in machines,
    motors, and the transmission of
    power](http://www.notechmagazine.com/2010/10/exhibiting-the-latest-progress-in-machines-motors-and-the-transmission-of-power-1892.html)",
    Benjamin Park, 1892
-   "[Make electricity while you
    exercise](http://www.motherearthnews.com/Renewable-Energy/2008-10-01/Pedal-Powered-Generators.aspx)",
    Mother Earth News, 2008
-   "[Luther's tool
    grinders](http://toolemera.com/catpdf/luther1920CAT.pdf)" (pdf, 5.8
    MB), hand and foot powered grinders catalog. Hosted at [Toolemera
    Blog](http://toolemera.com/).
-   "[Woodworkers' tools and
    machines](http://toolemera.com/catpdf/melhuish1925CAT.pdf)" (pdf, 29
    MB), product catalogue no.25, 1884, Richard Melhuish Ltd., Tool and
    Machine Merchants, London. Hosted at [Toolemera
    Blog](http://toolemera.com/).
-   "[Science & civilisation in China, Vol.5, Part
    9](http://books.google.com/books?id=X7X4A5efIooC&pg=PA215&lpg=PA215&dq=needham+treadle&source=bl&ots=15p6kkUaRV&sig=c9EUz06fVMihNBqpNEzv9xd4ZSE&hl=en&ei=wsDaTaPiAcyw8QORv6mEBQ&sa=X&oi=book_result&ct=result&resnum=1&ved=0CBoQ6AEwAA#v=onepage&q&f=false)",
    Joseph Needham, 1988

Related articles:



-   [How to make everything
    ourselves]({filename}/posts/how-to-make-everything-ourselves-open-modular-hardware.md):
    open modular hardware
-   [The mechanical transmission of
    power (1)]({filename}/posts/mechanical-transmission-of-power-stangenkunst.md):
    Stangenkunst
-   [The mechanical transmission of
    power (2)]({filename}/posts/the-mechanical-transmission-of-power-jerker-line-systems.md):
    jerker line systems
-   [The mechanical transmission of
    power (3)]({filename}/posts/the-mechanical-transmission-of-power-3-wire-ropes.md):
    endless rope drives
-   [Power from the
    tap]({filename}/posts/power-from-the-tap-water-motors.md):
    water motors
-   [Hand powered drilling tools and
    machines]({filename}/posts/hand-powered-drilling-tools-and-machines.md)
-   [Human powered cranes and lifting
    devices]({filename}/posts/history-of-human-powered-cranes.md):
    the sky is the limit
-   [Wind powered
    factories]({filename}/posts/history-of-industrial-windmills.md):
    the history and future of industrial windmills
-   [The bright future of solar powered
    factories]({filename}/posts/solar-powered-factories.md):
    we need a renewable source of heat energy
-   [The
    velomobile]({filename}/posts/the-velomobile-high-tech-bike-or-low-tech-car.md):
    high-tech bike or low-tech car?
-   [Cargo cyclists replace truck drivers on European city
    streets]({filename}/posts/jobs-of-the-future-cargo-cyclist.md)
-   [Build your own pedal powered
    machines](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/build-your-own-pedal-powered-machines.html):
    overview
-   Short posts on [pedal
    power](http://www.notechmagazine.com/pedal-power/) can be found at
    [No Tech Magazine](http://www.notechmagazine.com/)


