Title: Radiant & Conductive Heating Systems
Date: 2015-03-11 16:05
Author: Kris De Decker
Category: Low-tech Solutions
Slug: radiant-and-conductive-heating-systems
Status: published



Most modern heating systems are primarily based on the heating of air.
The [old way of warming was based upon radiation and
conduction]({filename}/posts/heating-people-not-spaces.md),
which have the potential to be more energy-efficient than convection.

While convection implies the warming of each cubic centimetre of air in
a space in order to keep people comfortable, radiation and conduction
can directly transfer heat to people, [making energy use independent of
the size of a room or
building]({filename}/posts/local-heating.md).

However, restoring the old way of warming would not make sense without
new technology. Most heating systems from the old days were inefficient,
polluting, dangerous and impractical. Today, we have better options
available, which can be combined in interesting ways.

Picture: An electric radiant heating panel or "dark radiator" mounted to
the wall. Source: [EasyTherm](http://www.easy-therm.com/en/welcome).


As we have seen in the [previous
article]({filename}/posts/heating-people-not-spaces.md),
heat can be transferred through convection (warming the air), conduction
(direct physical contact) and radiation (electromagnetic energy). Most
modern heating systems heat by convection, but it's important to note
that conductive and radiant heat sources also heat the air.

This is especially relevant for radiant heating sources. A 100% radiant
heater doesn't exist. The sun produces 100% radiation, but it sits in a
vacuum. On earth, the surface of a heating system will always make
contact with air, which is warmed by conduction and rises. Therefore, a
radiant heating device is defined as a heating device in which the share
of radiant heat in the total heat transfer is equal to or larger than
50%.

Tile Stoves or Masonry Heaters

There's one heating system from earlier times that's still very much
recommendable: the [tile stove or masonry
heater]({filename}/posts/tile-stoves.md). In
fact, there exists no modern heating device that can match the comfort
and energy efficiency of a tile stove with integrated bench seat or
sleeping platform, an appliance that combines heat transfer by radiation
and conduction. A tile stove provides a central place of comfort and
coziness that modern air heating systems no longer offer us.

A tile stove or masonry heater is also the most efficient and least
polluting way to heat with wood. It achieves this by a high thermal
mass, which allows wood combustion at very high temperatures without
overheating the room. Because of their high combustion efficiency (close
to 100%), and high heating efficiency (up to 90%), tile stoves use much
less wood and produce much less air pollution than a common wood stove
or a fireplace. \[1\]\[2\]\[3\]



A modern tile stove, made by a craftsman. Source: [De
Meiboom](http://www.demeiboom.eu/).

Furthermore, they have to be fired only once or twice a day and keep
radiating heat for about 12 to 24 hours, greatly reducing the work
required to heat a building by wood. In contrast, a wood stove or a
fireplace demand constant attention. Lastly, because it burns wood
cleanly, and because most of the heat is given off to the masonry
structure, a chimney fire is almost impossible.

The tile stoves of today are not comparable to those of yesteryear.
Great improvements were made in the eighteenth century, resulting in a
more efficient heating device&mdash;the Swedish "kakelugn". The design was
further improved in the 1970s by the Finnish, and the technology keeps
evolving. These days, masonry heaters can be built by craftsmen, or put
together from premanufactured parts. The second option is much cheaper,
but it limits you to the available forms and sizes. When a tile stove is
built by a craftsman, any form is possible.

The Drawbacks of Tile Stoves

The superior comfort and efficiency of the tile stove is not for
everybody, though. First of all, they are by far the largest and
heaviest heating systems around. Consequently, ample space and a sturdy
floor should be available. Logically, a tile stove or masonry heater
also requires a chimney. Furthermore, although tile stoves made from
modular parts can be moved, those built by craftsmen are forever
attached to the house they where built in, so they're not such an
attractive option for tenants.

Another disadvantage of a tile stove is that it can't provide heat
quickly. The high thermal mass of the structure delays the heat transfer
to the room. This is not a problem for spaces which are frequently used,
because thermal comfort can be maintained by firing the stove once or
twice per day, depending on the weather conditions. However, if there's
nobody around to fire the stove at least once a day, people arrive in a
cold house with a heating appliance that will work on full capacity only
many hours later. The convenience of our modern lifestyle might make us
see this as a bigger problem than we would have 150 years ago.

> The high thermal mass of a tile stove makes it best suited for
> frequently used rooms and for persistently cold weather

Because of its slow responsiveness, a tile stove or masonry heater is
also better suited for persistently cold weather than for a rapidly
fluctuating climate. If you have burnt too much wood in the morning,
there's no way to lower the heat production of the tile stove in the
afternoon; for instance, when the sun unexpectedly breaks through the
clouds and quickly warms up the house.



A tile stove, made by a craftsman. Source: [Lehm und
Feuer](http://l.facebook.com/l.php?u=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.lehmundfeuer.de%2F&h=IAQFq_EnC&s=1).

Likewise, if you have burnt insufficient wood, there's no way to raise
heat production in case the outside temperature drops unexpectedly. You
always have to wait for the next fire cycle to adapt the heat output of
the stove, which means you have to guess what the weather is going to be
like in the next 12 to 24 hours.

Finally, like any other radiant heating source, a tile stove only
provides warmth in the space that it's built in, not in other rooms. To
counter this issue, tile stoves can be constructed in each room, and
large tile stoves can be built through floors or walls to distribute
warmth throughout a building. However, since it concerns a large and
heavy heating device, these plans would require lots of money, time, and
a very sturdy building. The tile stove is thus better suited for large
spaces than for buildings with many smaller rooms.

Rocket Mass Heaters

Many features of the tile stove also apply to the rocket mass heater,
its low-tech cousin. The rocket mass heater only appeared in the 1980s,
resulting from research into [more efficient cooking
stoves]({filename}/posts/thermal-efficiency-cooking-stoves.md).
It heats more by conduction than by radiation; it uses the benchwork
around the heater to guide hot smoke gases towards the chimney. The
heater itself&mdash;usually a metal barrel&mdash;is rather small. Most of the
heat of the fire is stored in the masonry mass of the benchwork, from
where it's slowly released.





Above: Rocket mass heater by [Kruno
Ladišić](https://www.facebook.com/kruno.ladisic/media_set?set=a.814294758624744.1073741840.100001326816117&type=1&pnref=story).
Via [I fucking love rocket
stoves](https://www.facebook.com/RocketStoveScience). Below: Building a
rocket mass heater. Picture: [The Year of
Mud](http://www.theyearofmud.com/2009/04/27/building-a-rocket-stove-part-2-cob-bed-and-bench/).

Rocket mass heaters have some important advantages over tile stoves.
They are less heavy and bulky, and they are much cheaper and easier to
build. On the other hand, they are less efficient, have to be fired more
regularly, require more maintenance than tile stoves, and they are just
as slow to respond. This makes them best suited for frequently used
spaces and in persistently cold climates. Rocket mass heaters also
require long, straight wood.

Despite these drawbacks, a rocket mass heater is still a much more
efficient and comfortable choice than a common wood stove. If conditions
are right and you can't afford a masonry heater, building yourself a
rocket mass heater is still a viable option. A warning, though, from the
man who invented the device, Ianto Evans: "These stoves have not been in
regular use long enough to determine the real risk of chimney fires, so
inspect your chimney often." \[4\]

Thermally Active Building Surfaces

With the arrival of the public water supply in the nineteenth century, a
new radiant heating system appeared: building surfaces heated by hot
water running through a circuit of metal pipes. While these systems are
generally known as radiant or heated floors, we prefer the term
"thermally active building surfaces", as this technology also works in
walls and ceilings, and it can not only heat but also cool a building,
which is achieved by running cold water through the pipes. \[5\]

The heating of building surfaces, of course, took place long before the
nineteenth century. The Romans warmed their bath houses and large villas
with hypocausts, central heating systems that distributed the heat from
an underground fire through flues in floors and (sometimes) walls.
However, because of its high energy density, water is a better medium
for heat transfer than smoke. The water pipes can be much smaller than
the flue pipes, and the fire risk is greatly reduced. Nowadays, both
copper pipes and polyethylene ("PEX") tubes can be used to distribute
hot (and cold) water.

> Unlike tile stoves, thermally active building surfaces distribute
> warmth evenly throughout a space.

Like tile stoves, thermally active building surfaces have a high thermal
mass, which means that they can't give off heat quickly. Because of
this, they are best suited for frequently used spaces and steady, cold
temperatures. Unlike tile stoves, however, they distribute their warmth
evenly throughout a space, which means they're not suited to [localised
heating]({filename}/posts/heating-people-not-spaces.md).
With a thermally active building surface, the whole room will be
comfortable, regardless of how many people are inside and how much space
is being occupied.


radiant floor under construction. Source: [Wikipedia
Commons](http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Category:Underfloor_heating#mediaviewer/File:Top-heating-podlahove-topeni-kurenie-vytapeni-teplovodni-teplovodne_%28131%29.jpg).

The main advantage of thermally active building surfaces is that they
eliminate radiant temperature assymetry: there are no large differences
in temperature throughout the space. There's no need for local
insulation (hooded chairs, folding screens&mdash;[see the previous
article]({filename}/posts/heating-people-not-spaces.md))
to provide thermal comfort. On the downside, when compared with air
heating systems energy savings are usually rather small, unless the
water is heated by a solar collector or a heat pump.

Because of the large heating surface, water temperatures can be
relatively low, usually less than 30ºC (86ºF). Heat pumps and solar
collectors are very efficient in delivering these low temperatures. The
water for a heated building surface can also be warmed by a tile stove
(provided it has enough heating capacity), which is yet another way to
distribute the heat from a tile stove throughout a building.

Interestingly, thermally active building surfaces don't really heat us
through radiation. Because the temperature of the heating surface is
usually lower than our skin temperature, it is in fact us who are
heating the building surfaces by radiation. However, heated building
surfaces limit the radiant heat loss from our body to the environment,
providing thermal comfort in another way. They also produce a
significant share of convection (especially for floor heating), while
heated floors and walls can provide warmth through conduction.



The West facade of the Terrence Donnelly Centre for Celular and
Biomolecular Research in Toronto, Canada, a building that is heated and
cooled by thermally active building surfaces. Picture: [University of
Toronto](http://tdccbr.med.utoronto.ca/).

The main disadvantage of heated building surfaces is that they require
radical building renovation, because the floor, the wall or the ceiling
has to be broken away and built up again. Furthermore, thermal
insulation is a necessity for outer walls or a great deal of heat will
be lost to the outside.

Thermally active building surfaces are almost a logical choice for new
buildings, at least for frequently used spaces and especially in
climates that also need cooling during the summer months. However, if we
are looking for solutions to decrease energy use in the [buildings that
we already
have]({filename}/posts/local-heating.md), and to
save energy in temporarily heated spaces, we should look for other
options.

Infrared Heating Panels

The most recent radiant heating systems are infrared panels, which can
be operated by electricity or hot water. They can be useful both as an
alternative or as a complement to a tile stove or a heated building
surface. Hydronic (water-based) radiant heating panels came on the
market some 50 years ago, while electric radiant heating panels date
from the late 1990s. Both technologies have evolved a lot in recent
years. \[6\]\[7\]

> Radiant heating panels have little or no thermal mass and can produce
> heat very quickly

Like tile stoves, radiant panels heat locally, creating warmer
micro-climates within a cooler space. However, because infrared heating
panels have a thin metal heating surface with little or no thermal mass,
they can produce heat quickly. This makes them interesting options for
use in less frequently used spaces and in more changeable climates,
situations in which tile stoves, rocket mass heaters, and thermally
active building surfaces are less beneficial. Because radiant heating
panels can provide warmth quickly, a room need only be heated when
somebody enters it.


longwave infrared heating panels. Source:
[EasyTherm](http://www.easy-therm.com/en/welcome).

Radiant heating panels have more advantages over older systems. For
example, they are as light and compact as a tile stove is heavy and
bulky, and, unlike heated building surfaces, they are easy to install in
an existing building. Radiant panels can be mounted on the walls or the
ceiling, they can be free-hanging, or recessed into a suspended ceiling
system.

This makes it practical to use them in multiple rooms, and it also makes
them suitable for tenants, who can take their heating system with them
when they move to another place. On the downside, the heating surface of
a radiant panel cannot be touched safely because burns would occur
immediately. This means that heat transfer through conduction is
impossible.

Hydronic or Electric?

In hydronic panels, heated water flows through plastic or copper tubes
attached to a metal plate, which then radiates the heat into the space.
Electric panels look very similar, but the heat is produced by electric
resistance. Like water-based thermally active building surfaces,
hydronic radiant panels can also cool a building, something that
electric radiant heating panels can't do. On the other hand, electric
panels are easier to install and even more responsive than hydronic
panels&mdash;it takes less than 5 minutes before an electric panel radiates
heat at full power. \[6\]

Hydronic radiant heating panels should not be confused with the
so-called "radiators" that are common in many European buildings. While
these are hydronic heating systems too, their design is aimed at
producing the largest share of convection possible (which is why they
should actually be called "convectors"). The radiant metal surfaces of a
"radiator" are facing each other, so that most of the heating surface
can't radiate energy to people directly.



Hydronic heating and cooling radiant panels in a sports hall, aimed at
the audience. Source: [Zehnder
ZBN](http://www.buildingservicesindex.co.uk/entry/34230/Zehnder/Zehnder-ZBN-radiant-ceiling-panels/#description-block).

Instead, they radiate energy to each other, heating the air in between
the panels through conduction, which then rises and heats a space by
convection. Another difference is that "radiators" have lower surface
temperatures than infrared panels. As a consequence, the share of
radiant heat in the total heat transfer is only 20-30%. The same goes
for electric "radiators". \[8\]

Concerning electric radiant heating panels, it's important to note that
we are talking about electric *longwave* infrared heaters. These are not
to be confused with the older&mdash;and much better known&mdash;electric infrared heaters, which produce a glowing red light when in
operation. Longwave radiant heaters produce no visible light (they are
"dark radiators") and have much lower surface temperatures. Both
technologies have a different effect on health, which we will discuss at
the end of this article.

> Electric longwave infrared heaters are not to be confused with the
> older and much better known electric shortwave infrared heaters, which
> produce a glowing red light when in operation

Infrared heating panels are the perfect addition to a high mass radiant
heating system. For instance, an infrared heating panel can heat up
(part of) a room quickly while the tile stove comes to speed, which
solves the comfort problem for people who keep irregular schedules.
Likewise, the combination of a "fast" and a "slow" radiant heating
source offers more possibilities when dealing with changeable weather
conditions. Different radiant heating sources can also complement each
other in different rooms of the same building. For instance, a tile
stove in the living room can be combined with radiant heating panels in
less frequently used bedrooms and bathrooms.


radiant heating and cooling panels. Source: [Zehnder
ZBN](http://www.buildingservicesindex.co.uk/entry/34230/Zehnder/Zehnder-ZBN-radiant-ceiling-panels/#description-block).

However, it's important to keep in mind that radiant heating panels lose
part of their efficiency advantage over high mass radiant systems when
they are used continuously in frequently occupied rooms. This is
especially true for electric radiant panels, which experience large
energy conversion losses in the power plant. Electric radiant heating
panels might also lose their efficiency advantage over air heating
systems if they are used to heat a whole space instead of creating
micro-climates (see the [next
article]({filename}/posts/local-heating.md)).

Hybrid Heating Systems

Some radiant heating technologies blur the lines between the systems we
have discussed. For example, some electric and hydronic radiant heating
panels have a high thermal mass of natural stone, which basically turns
them into an electric or hydronic masonry heater. The high thermal mass
lowers the surface temperature, so these heating elements can also
provide heat transfer through conduction when we lean against them.




An hydronic stone radiator. Source:
[The-Radiators](http://the-radiators.com/stone-radiators).

Conversely, some electric and hydronic heating systems create thermally
active building surfaces with little or no thermal mass, using mats
(electricity) or interconnected prefabricated lightweight panels (water)
that can be attached to a building surface. These systems can be just as
responsive as radiant panels, but they distribute warmth throughout a
space rather than locally. They are also easier to install than high
thermal mass systems.



radiant heating panels that can be interconnected to build a thermally
active building surface. Source:[Ray
Magic](http://www.2hsc.com/messana/WhatIsRayMagic.html).

Vertical or Horizontal Radiant Heat?

As was noted at the beginning of the article, every radiant heating
source also warms the air. However, the share of radiation in the total
heat transfer of a radiant heat source can vary between 50 and 95%,
mainly depending on the orientation of the radiant heating surface.
Downward facing radiant heating surfaces reach the highest share of
radiation (up to 95%), while sidewards facing radiant heating surfaces
obtain 60-70% radiant heat transfer. Heat surfaces that are facing
upwards only reach 50-60% radiant heat transfer share. \[6\]\[9\]

The large influence of surface orientation has everything to do with the
natural, upward movement of hot air. Because downward convection doesn't
exist&mdash;warm air always rises&mdash;a downward facing radiant heat surface
produces almost no heating of the air. As a consequence, ceiling-mounted
radiant heating surfaces are the most energy efficient: to produce a
similar amount of radiation as a downward facing radiant heating panel
of 250 watts, a sidewards oriented panel requires 325 watts and an
upward-facing panel 350 watts. \[6\]

> While a ceiling-mounted panel maximizes radiant heat production, a
> vertically positioned panel maximizes radiant heat reception

However, the high share of radiant heat for downward facing heating
panels doesn't mean that the ceiling is by definition the most
appropriate place for a radiant heat source. Humans find themselves
mostly in a vertical position during waking hours, either standing up or
sitting down. So while a ceiling-mounted panel maximizes radiant heat. \[10\]


section of silhouettes of a subject in various postures, corresponding
to the areas illuminated by the sun's rays at the angles of altitude and
azimuth shown. From: "[Human Thermal Environments: The Effects of Hot,
Moderate, and Cold Environments on Human Health, Comfort, and
Performance, Third
Edition](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/146659599X/ref=as_li_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=146659599X&linkCode=as2&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkId=NMA5IA65R7XAKU3R)![](http://ir-na.amazon-adsystem.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=as2&o=1&a=146659599X){width="1"
height="1"}", Ken Parsons, 2014

A larger part of the body will be irradiated directly when the heating
surface is vertical&mdash;see the illustration above. If the heating
surface is aimed upwards or downwards, most radiant heat will pass along
the body, limiting the direct heating effect. A ceiling-mounted panel
only maximizes radiant heat reception when we are lying down&mdash;but then
we are mostly sleeping and under the covers.

Another reason to opt for a vertically oriented radiant heating surface
is radiant temperature assymetry. In the [previous
article]({filename}/posts/heating-people-not-spaces.md)
we have seen that the human body can experience large differences in
temperature when it's warmed by a local radiant heating source. A person
sitting in front of an open fire will receive sufficient radiant heat on
one side of their body, while the other side loses heat to the cold air
and surfaces at the opposite half of the room. However, the sensitivity
for radiant temperature assymetry is heavily influenced by the
orientation of the heating source.



Humans are least sensitive to the radiant temperature assymetry caused
by a warm, vertical surface such as a tile stove or a wall-mounted
infrared heating panel. The difference in radiant temperature can reach
up to 35ºC (63ºF) before 1 in 10 people will complain about thermal
discomfort. However, in the case of a warm downward-facing radiant heat
source, complaints have been noted at a temperature difference of only
4-7º C (7-13ºF). When the temperature difference amounts to 15ºC (27ºF),
50% of subjects report thermal discomfort. This is because the head is
the body part that is most sensitive to heat. \[10\]\[11\]\[12\]

The sensitivity to a hot surface above our heads is not a problem when
the whole ceiling is converted into a radiant heating source, as is the
case with a thermally active ceiling. Because of the large heating
surface, the radiant temperature of such a system can be very low, often
below skin temperature. However, the much higher temperatures of
electric or hydronic radiant heating panels could make temperature
assymetry problematic for some people.

Are Radiant Heating Systems Safe?

There's an important difference between the radiation originating from
the sun, and the radiation that's produced by the radiant heating
systems discussed here. The sun is much hotter, and it's the temperature
of an object that determines which wavelengths of the electromagnetic
spectrum dominate: the higher the temperature, the higher the share of
shortwave radiation. Because the sun has a very high surface
temperature, solar radiation also produces significant amounts of
harmful ultraviolet and shortwave infrared waves, which is why we are
advised against spending too much time in the sun. \[10\]

> Longwave infrared radiation doesn't penetrate the skin and is
> harmless. However, excessive use of shortwave infrared heaters or
> conductive heating systems could lead to a skin condition called
> *Erythema ab igne*.

However, if the surface temperature remains below 100ºC (212ºF), as is
the case with all the radiant heating systems we have discussed,
longwave infrared dominates the heat transfer. Longwave infrared
radiation doesn't penetrate the skin and is harmless, which is fortunate
considering our bodies constantly exchange longwave infrared radiation
with other bodies around us. \[13\]\[14\]

Fireplaces, wood stoves, and shortwave radiant space heaters are another
matter, though. While their surface temperature is not as high as that
of the sun, it's much higher than that of tile stoves, infrared panels
or heated building surfaces. This means that they also emit shortwave
radiation, and can have health consequences. \[13\]\[14\]



A 22 year old female with toasted skin syndrome, caused by a shortwave
radiant heating source. From "[Diseases of the
Skin](http://www.worldcat.org/title/diseases-of-the-skin/oclc/893738802)",
James H. Sequeira, 1915., also known as "thermal keratosis" or "toasted skin
syndrome", is a skin condition that's caused by repeated and prolonged
exposure to a heat source, resulting in patches on the skin. It's a
benign dermatitis and the patches usually disappear a few months after
the heat exposure ends. However, if the heat exposure continues, the
patchwork can become permanent. These cases can eventually develop into
skin cancer many years later, although this is rare. The main issue is
cosmetic, but the effect is quite spectacular&mdash;you might be tricked
into thinking that it's a tattoo.

The condition was first described in the early 1900s, but it must have
existed before this. In a 1920 medical handbook it's described as "a
rare disease of the anterior surface of the legs, leading to permanent
pigmentation and found in senile, weak or alcoholic individuals exposed
to intense heat (firemen, stokers)". \[15\] Recent papers about the
condition say that it was "fairly common in the elderly who stood or sat
closely to open fires or wood stoves". The condition would typically
present on the anterior shins and interior thighs because people would
warm themselves right in front of the stove.
\[16\]\[17\]\[18\]\[19\]\[20\]

Are Conductive Heating Systems Safe?

Nowadays, *Erythema ab igne* caused by a radiant heat source can appear
in chefs and bakers (on the arms) and in jewellers, silversmiths and
glassblowers (on the face) as an occupational disease. It has also been
observed on the legs of women who cook daily on open fires while seated
on the ground. Medical cases caused by sitting too close to a shortwave
radiant heat source are still recorded, although nowadays it usually
concerns red-glowing shortwave electric space heaters instead of
fireplaces or wood stoves. There are no reports of *Erythema ab igne*
being caused by longwave radiant heating sources.

However, modern conductive heating sources seem to present a risk.
Electric and hydronic heating elements with lower surface temperatures
can also be inserted in desks, tables, chairs or benches, or they can be
used as portable heating pads. If you can't afford a radiant floor, you
can opt for a [water-heated
carpet](http://amosys.en.ec21.com/Products--3850462.html), for instance.
Some of these technologies cross the boundary between furniture and
apparel, such as [heated
bracelets](http://www.gizmag.com/wristify-thermoelectric-bracelet/29543/)
or [electrically heated
clothes]({filename}/posts/heat-your-clothes-not-your-house.md).
Recent reports show *Erythema ab igne* appearing following the use of
heating pads, car seat heaters, heating blankets, hot water bottles, and
even laptops, hot baths and showers.



A cordless heated desk chair. Source:
[Hammacher](http://www.hammacher.com/Product/11580?source=CJ).

All reported cases are due to very frequent use of a heat source. For
example, two incidents concern a man that took 5 to 6 hot showers daily,
and a girl that took a daily hot bath of 60-90 minutes. \[16\]\[17\] A
16 year old boy developed patches in the neck after sleeping on a heated
pillow each night for two months, with the first patches appearing after
four weeks. \[18\] A case was reported of a woman who consistently used
her car's heated seats while driving 2 to 4 hours per day for several
years. \[19\] Most cases have been reported due to the use of hot water
bottles to relieve chronic pains. \[20\]

While some of these incidents are obviously the consequence of an
excessive use of conductive heating, others are not. For example, the
use of a conductive heat source for 2-4 hours per day&mdash;like the woman
in her car&mdash;is not unlikely in a space where conductive heating plays
an important role in providing thermal comfort. At the moment, only
individual cases have been reported, and we don't know if *Erythema ab
igne* appears in all people who use conductive heating sources for
prolonged times, or just in exceptional cases. Nevertheless, it's
obvious that conductive heating systems can have an effect on the skin,
so caution is advised.

In the next article, we investigate the [influence of local heating
systems on energy use, thermal comfort, and indoor
health]({filename}/posts/local-heating.md).

[Kris De Decker](http://www.krisdedecker.org) (edited by [Jenna
Collett](http://click.typepad.com/api/click?format=go&jsonp=vglnk_jsonp_14040698156716&key=7626aa89b5cdca8c8b5ad715622cd669&libId=d1fdef94-0fb9-4ef4-84a2-1dd653356ab1&loc=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.lowtechmagazine.com%2F2014%2F06%2Fthermal-efficiency-cooking-stoves.html&v=1&out=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.linkedin.com%2Fpub%2Fjenna-collett%2F1a%2F925%2Fb3&ref=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.lowtechmagazine.com%2F&title=LOW-TECH%20MAGAZINE%3A%20Well-Tended%20Fires%20Outperform%20Modern%20Cooking%20Stoves&txt=Jenna%20Collett))

![](https://www.paypalobjects.com/en_US/i/scr/pixel.gif){width="1"
height="1"}----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Notes:

\[1\] "[Masonry Heaters: Designing, Building, and Living with a Piece of
the
Sun](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/1603582134/ref=as_li_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=1603582134&linkCode=as2&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkId=ZCVTEFBADKMIWIHC)![](http://ir-na.amazon-adsystem.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=as2&o=1&a=1603582134){width="1"
height="1"}", Ken Matesz, 2010

\[2\] "[Poêles à accumulation: le meilleur du chauffage au
bois](http://www.amazon.fr/Po%C3%AAles-%C3%A0-accumulation-meilleur-chauffage/dp/2914717806)",
Vital Bies and Marie Milesi, 2011

\[3\] "[The Book of Masonry Stoves: Rediscovering an Old Way of
Warming](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/1890132098/ref=as_li_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=1890132098&linkCode=as2&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkId=ELXQCAXGMLF3WP5K)![](http://ir-na.amazon-adsystem.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=as2&o=1&a=1890132098){width="1"
height="1"}", David Lyle, 1984

\[4\] "[Rocket Mass Heaters, Third
Edition](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0966373847/ref=as_li_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0966373847&linkCode=as2&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkId=BPESJD4TPOH3UKUD)![](http://ir-na.amazon-adsystem.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=as2&o=1&a=0966373847){width="1"
height="1"}", Ianto Evans, Leslie Jackson, 2013

\[5\] "[Thermally Active Surfaces in
Architecture](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B00E7JQESW/ref=as_li_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=B00E7JQESW&linkCode=as2&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkId=N2VUCKDY7JUMVUTC)",
Kiel Moe, 2010

\[6\] [Radiant Heating and Cooling Handbook (Mcgraw-Hill
Handbooks)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B00LVDVS8I/ref=as_li_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=B00LVDVS8I&linkCode=as2&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkId=WTF5AZV7AQ2ZW74T)![](http://ir-na.amazon-adsystem.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=as2&o=1&a=B00LVDVS8I){width="1"
height="1"}, Richard Watson, 2008

\[7\] Personal communication, Leo & Richard de Mos, Li-tech/Prestyl.

\[8\] "[Faber & Kell's Heating & Air-conditioning of
Buildings](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/041552265X/ref=as_li_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=041552265X&linkCode=as2&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkId=KG63LLBSTX3NBBMY)![](http://ir-na.amazon-adsystem.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=as2&o=1&a=041552265X){width="1"
height="1"}", Doug Oughton & Stephen Hodkinson, 2008

\[9\] "[Beispielhafte Vergleichsmessung zwischen
Infrarothstrahlungsheizung und Gasheizung im
Altbaubereich](http://www-user.rhrk.uni-kl.de/~kosack/forschung/?INFRAROT-STRAHLUNGSHEIZUNG)",
Peter Kosack, TU Kaiserslautern, 2009

\[10\] "[Human Thermal Environments: The Effects of Hot, Moderate, and
Cold Environments on Human Health, Comfort, and Performance, Third
Edition](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/146659599X/ref=as_li_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=146659599X&linkCode=as2&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkId=NMA5IA65R7XAKU3R)![](http://ir-na.amazon-adsystem.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=as2&o=1&a=146659599X){width="1"
height="1"}", Ken Parsons, 2014

\[11\] "[Thermisch
Binnenklimaat](http://www.arbokennisnet.nl/images/dynamic/Dossiers/Klimaat_verlichting/D_Thermisch_binnenklimaat.pdf)"
(PDF), Atze Boerstra et al., 2008

\[12\] "[Modeling Thermal Comfort with Radiant Floors and
Ceilings](https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5764d997)", Z. Wang, 4th
International Building Physics Conference 2009, June 15-18, Istanbul

\[13\] "[ICNIRP Statement on Far Infrared Radiation
Exposure](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17099407)", ICNIRP, 2006

\[14\] "[ICNIRP Guidelines on Limits of Exposure to Incoherent Visible
and Infrared
Radiation](http://www.icnirp.org/cms/upload/publications/ICNIRPVisible_Infrared2013.pdf)"
(PDF), ICNIRP, 2013

\[15\] "[Dermatology: the essentials of cutaneous
medicine](https://archive.org/details/dermatologyesse00highgoog)",
Walter James Highman, 1921

\[16\] "[Some like it hot: Erythema Ab Igne due to Cannabinoid
Hyperemesis](http://www.pubfacts.com/detail/23613265/Some-like-it-hot:-erythema-ab-igne-due-to-cannabinoid-hyperemesis.)",
Ryan R. Kramer, 2014

\[17\] "[Erythema ab igne caused by frequent hot
bathing](http://www.researchgate.net/publication/10909985_Erythema_ab_igne_caused_by_frequent_hot_bathing)",
Sung-Jan Ling, 2002

\[18\] "[Thermal pillow: an unusual causative agent of erythema ab
igne](http://www.turkishjournalpediatrics.org/pediatrics/pdf/pdf_TJP_1276.pdf)"
(PDF), Enver Turan et al., 2013

\[19\] "[Erythema ab igne: evolving technology, evolving
presentation](https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9mh1q9qg)", Katarine
Kesti et al, 2014

\[20\] "[Erythema ab igne: a case
report](http://images.bimedia.net/documents/laptopcomputerburns_evms.pdf)"
(PDF), Melinda Mohr et al., 2005

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Related Articles:

-   [Restoring the Old Way of Warming: Heating People, not
    Places]({filename}/posts/heating-people-not-spaces.md)
-   [How to Keep Warm in a Cool
    House]({filename}/posts/local-heating.md)
-   [The Revenge of the Ceiling
    Fan]({filename}/posts/circulating-fans-air-conditioning.md)
-   [Insulation: First the Body, then the
    Home]({filename}/posts/body-insulation-thermal-underwear.md)
-   [Heat your Clothes, not your
    House]({filename}/posts/heat-your-clothes-not-your-house.md)
-   [The Solar Envelope: How to Heat and Cool Cities without Fossil
    Fuels]({filename}/posts/solar-oriented-cities-1-the-solar-envelope.md)
-   [Don't Heat your Room with Tea
    Candles](http://www.notechmagazine.com/2014/11/dont-heat-your-room-with-tea-candles.html)

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
