Title: Recycling animal and human dung is the key to sustainable farming
Date: 2010-09-15 20:51
Author: Kris De Decker
Category: Low-tech Solutions
Slug: recycling-animal-and-human-dung-is-the-key-to-sustainable-farming
Status: published



Flushing the water closet is handy, but it wreaks ecological havoc,
deprives agricultural soils of essential nutrients and makes food
production dependent on fossil fuels. For 4,000 years, human excrements
and urine were considered extremely valuable trade products in China,
Korea and Japan. Human dung was transported over specially designed
canal networks by boats.

Thanks to the application of human "waste" products as fertilizers to
agricultural fields, the East managed to feed a large population without
polluting their drinking water. Meanwhile, cities in medieval Europe
turned into open sewers. The concept was modernized in late 19th century
Holland, with Charles Liernur's sophisticated vacuum sewer system.

Â© Illustrations in red & black: [Diego
Marmolejo](http://ddidak.blogspot.com/) for low-tech magazine.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The innocent looking water closet breaks up a natural cycle in our food
supply. Basically, it turns extremely valuable resources into waste
products. When we grow crops, we withdraw essential nutrients from the
soil: potassium, nitrogen and phosphate, to name but the most important.
During the greater part of human history, we recycled these nutrients
through our bodies and returned them to the soil, via excreta, food
trimmings and the burial of dead. Today, we flush them mostly into the
sea (see the infographic below,
[source](http://humanurehandbook.com/contents.html)).



This is problematic and unsustainable, for three main reasons. To start,
dumping sewage in rivers, lakes and seas kills fish and makes fresh
water undrinkable. This can only be avoided by extending the water
closet and the already very costly sewerage network with an equally
expensive infrastructure of sewage stations (which does not completely
eliminate the detrimental effect on water life).

Secondly, we need artificial fertilizers to keep our soil fertile. In
2008, almost 160 million tonnes of inorganic fertilizers were used
worldwide ([1](http://www3.omu.edu.tr/anajas/pdf/21%282%29/243-248.pdf)
& [2](ftp://ftp.fao.org/agl/agll/docs/cwfto13.pdf)). Without these, our
agricultural soils would lose their fertility in just a few years time,
followed by an inevitable collapse of food production and human
population. A third problem is that the water closet logically consumes
large quantities of fresh water to flush everything "away".

Water closets are energy-intensive

Fresh water production, the construction and maintenance of sewers, the
treatment of sewage (and sewage sludge), and the production of inorganic
fertilizers are all energy-intensive processes. Nitrogen (which makes up
more than half of total fertilizer consumption) is abundantly available
in air, but to convert it to a useful form the gas has to be heated and
pressurized. The energy for this (polluting) process is delivered by
natural gas or (in China) by coal plants.

Potassium and phosphate have to be mined (up to depths of several
thousands of feet) and transported. It takes more than 150 million
tonnes of phosphate rock to produce our current yearly supply of 37
million tonnes of phosphate fertilizer, and 45 million tonnes of potash
ore to produce 25 million tonnes of potassium fertilizer. Both
operations are energy intensive and pollute the environment.



Moreover, while potassium is widely distributed and abundantly available
(we have enough economically obtainable reserves to last 700 years at
our current consumption rate), phosphorus is not. Ninety percent of
global phosphate reserves are only found in a handful of countries, and
economically recoverable reserves large enough to meet agricultural
demand are estimated to last for only 30 to 100 years. Reserves are much
larger if mining phosphates from the seabed is included, but this would
be extremely energy-intensive, further deterioriating the sustainability
of the food and sanitation system.

The only way to get nutrients from sea to land is via marine bird
droppings - which is of course in very short supply - or by eating fish
or seafood. However, once we have digested our fish and chips, the
nutrients filter down to the sea via the sewer network.

A sign of civilization

The existence of the water closet and the accompanying sewer system is
seldom questioned. It is viewed as an obvious technology and generally
regarded as a sign of civilization - countries that do not have such a
system today are considered retarded or backward. The reason for this is
because we have been conditioned to believe that the water closet and
the sewer system are the only alternatives to stench and disease.

> We have been conditioned to believe that the water closet and the
> sewer system are the only alternatives to stench and disease

Following the demise of the Roman Empire (with its early sewers and
water closets) and right up to the end of the nineteenth century, the
concentrated and unorganised distribution of human excrements in
groundwater, city canals and rivers brought recurrent deadly epidemics
of cholera and typhoid fever throughout the western world. These were
caused by drinking water contaminated with faeces. People answered
nature's call on the streets or emptied their honey buckets in
backyards, open courtyards, badly sealed cesspools or surface waters -
methods that were not conducive to healthy living in densely populated
cities. Water closet and sewer system have solved this, at least in the
rich world, and nobody wants to go back to the miserable hygienic
conditions of those times.


Chinese agriculture

However, as obvious as it seems to us today, the water closet is not the
only possible answer to the problem of sanitation. There are other, much
more sustainable methods to separate human waste from drink water
supplies. To start with, the grim sanitary conditions of the Middle Ages
and the early Industrial Revolution were a purely western phenomenon. At
the turn of the twentieth century in the East, the water in Chinese
rivers was safe to drink.

The Chinese were as numerous as the Americans and Europeans at the time,
and they had large, densely populated cities, too. The difference was
that they maintained an agricultural system that was based on human
"waste" as a fertilizer. Stools and urine were collected with care and
discipline, and transported over sometimes considerable distances. They
were mixed with other organic waste, composted and then spread across
the fields (illustration on the right).

That's killing two birds with one stone: no pollution of drinking water,
and an agricultural system that could have lasted forever. In fact, it
did last 4,000 years, which is considerably longer than even our most
abundant resource - potassium, with 700 years of reserves - will allow.

The Chinese agricultural system, which was also applied in Korea and
Japan, is extensively described in "[Farmers of Forty
Centuries](http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924073872685)", a report
of a study trip by the American soil scientist F.H. King. The book was
published in 1911, around the time of the discovery of the Haber-Bosch
process that would lead to the breakthrough of cheap artificial nitrogen
fertilizer. King devoted an [entire
chapter](http://www.archive.org/stream/cu31924073872685#page/n214/mode/1up)
to the collection and use of human fertilizer by the Asians. Joseph
Needham also gives an account of the method, in volume VI:2 of "[Science
and civilization in China](http://www.nri.org.uk/science.html)", citing
various earlier sources. More recently, Duncan Brown talks about the
Chinese system in his book "[Feed or Feedback: Agriculture, Population
Dynamics and the State of the
Planet](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/905727048X?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=905727048X)![](http://www.assoc-amazon.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=as2&o=1&a=905727048X){width="1"
height="1"}".

Dung traders

When King visited China, the population was estimated at about 400
million adult inhabitants, compared to some 400 million inhabitants in
Europe and 100 million inhabitants in the US. The stools and urine of
those 400 million people were collected in terracotta jars, with
air-tight seals. The matter was gathered from every home, from the tiny
country villages to the great cities. In some cities, special canal
networks and boats were constructed for this purpose (picture below).
This was the case in Hankow-Wuchang-Hanyang, for example, a city with
almost 1.8 million inhabitants living in an area of only 6.5 square
kilometres. You could thus argue that the Chinese *did* have a water
carriage sewer network, though the difference to ours is stark.



Around the time of King's visit, every year in China more than
182,000,000 tonnes of human manure was collected in cities and villages
- 450 kilogram (900 pounds) per person per year. This was good for a
total of 1,160,000 tonnes of nitrogen, 376,000 tonnes of potassium and
150,000 tonnes of phosphate which was returned to the soil. In 1908
Japan, 23,850,295 tonnes of "humanure" was collected and given back to
the soil.



Shanghai traded and distributed the yield of its inhabitants over a
specially designed canal network using hundreds of boats (see map on the
left, click to enlarge), a trade that brought in 100,000s of dollars
every year. Human manure was considered a valuable commodity. In 1908, a
Chinese business man paid the city 31,000 dollar (this would be more
than 700,000 dollars today) to obtain the right to remove 78,000 tonnes
of humanure per year from a region of the city to sell it to the farmers
on the countryside.

In Japan, which was much more urbanized than China, people paid less
rent when they left their landlord better quality excrements. King
describes loads of human dung taken from Tokyo and Yokahama "carried on
the shoulders of men and on the backs of animals, but most commonly on
strong carts drawn by men, bearing six to ten tightly covered wooden
containers holding forty, sixty or more pounds each". On the Japanese
countryside, it was not unusual to see signs that invited passers-by to
please answer nature's call on site. The farmers used the product to
manure their fields.

The practice of recycling human dung in Asian countries repelled some
foreign visitors. The Portuguese explorer Fernam Mendez Pinto [wrote in
1583](http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924011271826):

> "You must know that in this country there are many of such as make a
> trade of buying and selling mens Excrements, which is not so mean a
> commerce among them, but that there are many of them grow rich by it,
> and are held in good account. They which make a trade of buying it go
> up and down the streets with certain Clappers, like our Spittle men,
> whereby they give to understand what they desire without publishing of
> it otherwise to people, in regard the thing is filthy of itself;
> whereunto I will adde thus much, that this commodity is so much
> esteemed among them, and so great a trade driven of it, that into one
> sea port, sometimes there comes in one tyde two or three hundred Sayls
> laden with it." (sic)

The 4,000 year old closed-loop system vanished with the arrival of
artificial fertilizers, which were imported from the West during the
first decades of the twentieth century. Today, China is the largest
consumer of inorganic fertilizers with 28 percent of total world
consumption. Asia as a whole now uses more than half of the world's
artificial fertilizer.

Night soil collection in Europe

The collection of human "waste" also occured in Europe, be it for a much
shorter time and on a much smaller scale. The second half of the
nineteenth century marked the end of a predominantly agricultural period
in Europe; migration to the cities accelerated and the problem of sewage
disposal got much worse.



At the same time, health experts started to realize that cholera and
typhoid fever were the consequences of drinking contaminated water.
Since agriculture was increasingly short of animal manure, it appeared
that both problems could be solved at the same time. The first system,
which was set up in several countries and cities, is generally known as
"night soil" collection and reminds of the Asian method.

Dung and urine were accumulated in movable wooden receptacles beneath
the privy seat and mixed with earth, ashes or charcoal to prevent
offensive odours. Night soil collectors came by at more or less regular
intervals (mostly at night, hence the name) to pick up the merchandise.
See picture above
([source](http://www.bronnenuitamsterdam.nl/weergave.asp?ID=6)) and
below
([source](http://www.jenneken.nl/bekijk/1900afvoervanmestenhuisvuil.htm)).

This happened either by emptying the full tubs into a cart and giving
them back immediately (which meant the cleansing had to be done by the
users), or by placing the full tubs in a wagon, switching them for fresh
ones (which meant the cleansing had to be done by the scavengers). The
empty tubs were replaced under the privy seat, and the cargo was
transported via horse and cart to a collection point outside the city.
There it was converted into compost for use in agriculture.



Unfortunately, the collection and transport of the waste was not as
reliable, efficient and sanitary as was the case in China, Korea or
Japan. All was good when air-tight containers were used, but this was
not always done. When open carts were applied, the transport caused
waste and foul smell (see the 19th century cartoon below,
[source](http://www.bronnenuitamsterdam.nl/weergave.asp?ID=17)). Sewage
was spilled while carrying the tubs down the stairs and while emptying
them into the carts. Moreover, the collection did not always happen that
frequently, especially in poorer neighbourhoods.

Nevertheless, the wooden tub system was an improvement over the
comparitive disorder of nightsoil collection in Europe. Throughout the
Middle Ages, so-called dung farmers gathered human and animal excrements
from streets, backyards and cesspools and sold these to farmers who
applied them to their fields. The problem was that these scavengers
needed to collect enough dung before they could sell a cartload. Duncan
Brown cites Cipolla, who describes the situation concisely:

> "The most pathetically tragic aspect of this business was that of the
> people, whose poverty was so abject that they collected the manure
> they found in the streets where they kept it \[at their homes\] until
> they had accumulated a sufficient quantity to sell."



There were exceptions, notably in Flanders, where an organized nightsoil
collecting system that reminds of the Chinese method was set up as early
as the Middle Ages. Around the town of Antwerp, the management of
organic wastes (human excrements, dung of city horses, pigeon dung,
canal mud and food scraps) had become a significant industry by the 16th
century. By the 18th century there were great stores along the river the
Schelde where the excrements from Dutch towns were transported by barge.

The vacuum sewers of Charles Liernur

A second collection method was pioneered by Dutch engineer Charles
Liernur in 1866
([patent](http://www.sewerhistory.org/images/aus/aus4/1892_482439.pdf) -
pdf). His vacuum sewer system combined the comfort of today's water
carriage sewer network with the ecological and manurial advantages of
the earlier scavenging methods. A closet inside every home was connected
to an underground small diameter pipeline infrastructure, and the stools
and urine immediately left the house following deposition.

> The Liernur system combined the comfort of today's water carriage
> sewer network with the ecological and manurial advantages of the
> earlier scavenging methods

The crucial difference with today's technology, however, was that the
Liernur system did not use water but atmospheric pressure as a transport
medium. This meant that it avoided the dilution of the manure by the
admixture of water, thus preserving its value as a fertilizer - which
was Liernur's explicit intention. On the other hand, the vacuum sewer
system did away with the need for scavengers to visit every house,
lugging around buckets of poo and pee, and disturbing everyone's sleep.
It was a clear improvement on the night soil systems, including the one
used in Asia.


Dutch cities were equipped with the Liernur system: Leiden in 1871,
Amsterdam in 1872 and Dordrecht in 1874. Initially, only a couple of
thousand homes were connected to the vacuum sewer network, but in
Amsterdam the system was expanded substantially. At the end of the
nineteenth century, about 90,000 Amsterdam inhabitants were linked to
the Liernur sewer network, some 20 percent of the population. In
Amsterdam and Leiden, the system remained in operation for almost 40
years. The Liernur system was also introduced on a smaller scale in
Prague (Czech republic), Trouville sur Mer (France), Hanau (Germany) and
Stansed (England). The system in Trouville, installed in 1892, was
operated until 1987
([source](http://www.eauquebec.com/eau/eaux-usees/volume3.pdf), pdf).
Today, the method is still being used in ships, trains and airplanes.

The French designed their own version of the Liernur system - the
Berlier system. It was introduced in 1880 for a trial period in Lyon,
where it successfully removed sewage over a distance of four kilometres
(2.5 miles). In 1881, a five kilometre network was introduced for trial
in a Paris neighbourhood. The French took the trials very seriously: the
sewage was observed by placing glass pipes at various points. The
Berlier system, which was technically superior to the Liernur system,
worked flawlessly: the thousand soldiers in the barracks of PÃ©piniÃ¨re,
where it was in operation, were the only troops in Paris that were not
affected by a serious typhoid epidemic.

The arrival of the water closet

In spite of the technical success, the Berlier system never ascended
beyond the experimental stage. The Dutch Health Advisory Board advised a
general, national introduction of the Liernur system in 1873, following
the successful operation in Amsterdam, but this did not happen either.
Liernur designed plans for other cities in Europe (Paris, Berlin,
Stockholm, Munchen, Stuttgart and Zurich) and in the US (Baltimore), but
these were never realised.

There were several reasons why the pneumatic systems did not became the
standard sewerage systems of today. Firstly, there was the arrival of
the water closet and the waterworks. In the Netherlands, a growing
number of people connected a water closet to the Liernur system,
diluting the stools and urine in such a matter that their agricultural
value declined considerably.

Even before this happened, the sale of the sewage for use as manure did
not give the profits that were expected. Health experts advanced that
profits should not be the first aim of a sanitary system, but the
problem was that Liernur himself had stressed financial profits as an
important advantage of his system. This had attracted investors, and
they promptly left the technology behind when they started to lose
money.

> The installation of a vacuum sewer system is twice as cheap as the
> construction of a traditional sewer system

An important problem, not only in the Netherlands but throughout the
western world, was the growing size of cities. Both the night soil
system and the more sophisticated methods were eventually beaten by the
logistics of maintaining the practice in huge cities supported by far
away farms. The last blow for the vacuum sewer system was the appearance
of inorganic fertilizers after a cheap production method was found in
1910. The shortage of fertilizers in agriculture was "solved".


Because cities had started building water carriage systems for the
discharge of storm drain water, the next logical step was to allow the
discharge of sewage via the same network. Basically, this was a step
backwards: excrements were again drained on surface waters, not
necessarily in the immediate surroundings but a few miles further
downstream. It took another 70 years before sewage stations became
(relatively) common in the rich world.

Only three future possibilities

If we want to restore the natural cycle of our food supply, there are
only three technological possibilities. We could develop a modern
variant of the scavenging method using composting toilets, in which the
stools are collected from individual homes together with other organic
waste products. Urine could go to a separate tank that is emptied once a
year by a tanker (this method exists in some Dutch and Swedish
residential areas where people use so-called urine separation closets).
Or, we could develop a modern variant of the Liernur or Berlier system,
in which the sewage is collected automatically, but without the use of
water.

Vacuum sewer systems have found a limited application in some new
housing estates since the 1960s and 1970s. A few hundred systems are in
operation in the US, the UK, Australia, Germany, the Maledives, Southern
Africa and the Middle East
([overview](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vacuum_sewer#Project_Examples)).
The installation of a vacuum sewer system is twice as cheap as the
construction of a traditional sewer system. A vacuum system is also
faster to construct and easier to maintain: it consists of much smaller
diameter tubes that have to be laid less deep into the ground - a
[narrow trench](http://www.quavac.com/products/vacuum/history/) in the
road-surface suffices.

There is a third techno-fix, but it is many times more expensive than
the other two: using the diluted sewage from our water carriage system
as a fertilizer. Basically, this adds another layer of costly
infrastructure and complexity on top of an already very costly and
complex system. Diluted sewage not only has to be dried, but also
purified. This is because sewage sludge does not only contain human
waste but also many other (including toxic) waste resources, both from
households and factories.

Interestingly, when we remove urine and excrements from the sewer
system, we might as well eliminate the water carriage sewer system
altogether, further obtaining substantial cost and energy savings. There
are workable alternatives for the removal of storm water (basically
[reducing paved
surface](http://www.notechmagazine.com/2009/05/how-to-depave-the-planet.html))
and for the [local treatment and re-use of grey
water](http://pruned.blogspot.com/2009/06/wetland-machine-of-sidwell.html).

Composting

Human faeces and urine can only be used as a fertilizer following
further treatment. This was an already known fact by early Chinese
agricultural writers, who warned that untreated humanure could "burn and
kill plants, rot the shoots and harm human hands and feet". Today we
know it also carries more severe health risks. F.H. King and Joseph
Needham praise the composting efforts of the early Chinese, who often
combined their privy with the family pigsty (see illustration below).
However, Duncan Brown is more critical of their composting techniques.
The health advantages that the Chinese gained by keeping their drinking
water supplies clean, were partly offset by the transmission of diseases
via food crops:

> "Gastro-intestinal diseases were endemic throughout the region. In
> Korea and Japan, fluke diseases were common because of the practice of
> eating raw fish grown in ponds fertilized with human excrement. But
> those diseases could have been largely avoided with a better
> understanding of their nature and modes of transmission. If properly
> used, devices like the relatively modern sceptic tank, the more modern
> oxidation tank or the so-called composting toilet can avoid the danger
> of gastro-intestinal diseases previously associated with the use of
> human excrement as manure."



A process of composting should always come first, and this can happen in
two ways. The first - slow composting - is a do-it-yourself technique
that is explained in the "[Humanure
Handbook](http://humanurehandbook.com/contents.html)", an online
practical guide by Joseph Jenkins (who coined the term 'humanure'). Slow
composting happens at low temperatures and takes about one year in a
moderate climate. To be secure, most say the resulting (odourless)
compost should only be used for growing crops where there is no direct
contact between food and fertilizer (like fruit trees) and for inedible
plants (flowers, houseplants).

The second method is composting at high temperatures, which goes much
faster and results in a fertilizer that can be applied to any kind of
food crop. It is an industrial process, which is being applied
successfully in several countries for a number of years. Interestingly,
the first step of this process also generates electricity, further
improving the sustainability of the whole system. Since 2005, a factory
of the Dutch company
[Orgaworld](http://www.orgaworld.nl/nl/index_gbnl.html) composts diapers
(from babies and elderly) together with many other kinds of organic
waste. It is a high-tech process that takes about 6 weeks and results in
a high-quality compost, free from pathogens, medicines and hormones. The
company has also built two factories in Canada and is building plants in
the UK.

Can we feed the world using humanure?

Can we produce enough natural fertilizer to substitute for synthetic
nitrogen and mined potassium and phosphates? According to the figures
collected by F.H. King, an adult person produces on average 1,135 grams
of dung and urine each day. How much nitrogen, potassium and phosphates
does this contain? That all depends on the diet.

From the China of 100 years ago, King cites different research results,
ranging from 2.9 to 6 kilogram (5.8 to 12 pounds) of nitrogen per person
per year, 0.9 to 2 kilogram (1.8 to 4 pounds) of potassium per person
per year, and 0.4 to 1.5 kilogram (0.8 to 3 pounds) of phosphates per
person per year.

> If we recycle our own waste products, fertilizer production would
> automatically keep up with population growth

At present, the world population is estimated at 6,800,000,000 people.
Let's assume they all have a similar diet as the early 20th century
Chinese and that the highest figures given by King more closely resemble
today's diets (reliable present-day figures are hard to find). This
would mean that the total world population could produce 40.8 million
tonnes of nitrogen, 14 million tonnes of potassium and 10.4 million of
phosphates. Is that enough to eliminate the need for artificial
fertilizers? At first sight, no. Today's artificial fertilizer
production is:

-   99.9 million tonnes of nitrogen, or more than double the amount that
    all people could possibly produce (40.8 million tonnes)
-   37 million tonnes of phosphates, almost 4 times the amount that all
    people could produce (14 million tonnes)
-   25.8 million tonnes of potassium, or more than 1.8 times the amount
    that all people could produce (10.4 million tonnes)

Livestock

However, we humans have "outsourced" a considerable amount of dung
production to farm animals. A large amount of artificial fertilizer is
used to produce livestock feed. These animals produce much more manure
than all the people on the planet. Livestock excreta in 2004 were
estimated to contain 125 million tonnes of nitrogen and 58 million
tonnes of phosphates (there are no figures for potassium, which we will
further ignore). That's 3 times more nitrogen and 6 times more
phosphates than can be found in humanure.

Animals played a minor role in the Chinese humanure-based agricultural
economy, but the European farmers in the Middle Ages relied heavily upon
livestock for manure, which was their main fertilizer. Animal manure was
never wasted. Joseph Needham cites Fussell:

> "European farmers of the 15th to 17th centuries, both high and low,
> had one main worry, manure. They dared not neglect any source of
> supply, however minute, for the success of every crop they grew
> depended largely on the amount they could accumulate for use. They
> were willing to undertake the labours of Hercules to build a
> sufficient dunghill".

There are many good reasons to cut back on meat consumption, both for
our health and for the environment - livestock production is also the
main driver of deforestation (in its turn a major driver of soil
degradation). However, if we don't want to give up our high meat
consumption, the least we should do is "to undertake the labours of
Hercules to build a sufficient dunghill".



It would not only save us the effort to produce an ever increasing
amount of artificial fertilizers, but it would also stop the devastating
ecological consequences of dumping 91 million tonnes of nitrogen and 49
million tonnes of phosphates into the environment every year. Most of
this is discharged without any treatment, illegally, or legally by
overdosing it on fields near cities as a cost-effective waste management
practice.

Food scraps & management techniques

There is another source of natural fertilizer material that is being
wasted - food scraps. In this case, too, we turn a valuable resource
into a waste product. Food scraps could be fed to animals like pigs,
greatly [improving the sustainability of meat
production](http://www.notechmagazine.com/2010/09/converting-waste-into-meat.html).
But, instead, we feed them grain. Of all the food scraps produced in the
US, only 3 percent is currently being recycled. The rest ends up in
landfills, producing large amounts of greenhouse gases.

There is also a large potential to lower demand - one of the main
problems with today's fertilizer use is overconsumption. Artificial
fertilizers are cheap and as a result farmers prefer to dose their crops
with too much fertilizer, instead of risking not using enough and
lowering their yields. This means that more nutrients are lost through
soil erosion, runoff and leaching - which also pollutes groundwater,
rivers and seas, because these nutrients do not pass through sewage
stations.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

> The main problem is not that we produce inorganic fertilizers it's
> that we don't recycle them

Things were very different in the early Chinese agricultural system and
during the European Middle Ages. There was never a surplus of
fertilizer, so farmers applied it thoughtfully. With more careful
techniques, today's farmers could get the same yields with the use of
much less fertilizer. The use of crop rotation, intercropping and green
manure, all historically important techniques which are still being
applied in today's organic agriculture, could further reduce the demand
for fertilizers.

Nutrient balance

Let's digest all this information for a second. On the one hand, we have
livestock and people, who together produce 166 million tonnes of
nitrogen and 72 million tonnes of phosphates. Almost all of this is
wasted, wreaking ecological havoc.



At the same time, our factories produce 99.9 million tonnes of
artificial nitrogen fertilizer and 37 million tonnes of phosphates. A
completely superfluous operation that further increases pollution and
consumes vast amounts of energy. With the expected human (and livestock)
population growth, not to mention the rise of energy crops to make
[biofuels]({filename}/posts/algae-fuel-biof.md),
both biological and artificial production will rise even further, making
everything only worse.

We have more than likely already passed the stage where humanity could
be sustained without inorganic fertilizers. It is, after all, artificial
fertilizers that caused the population boom of the 20th century.
However, this should not be a problem. The large amounts of human and
animal dung include nutrients which originate from inorganic
fertilizers, since we all eat food that is largely grown by means of
inorganic fertilizers. It is estimated that humans have already doubled
the amount of nutrients in the global ecosystem. Thus, the main problem
is not that we produce inorganic fertilizers it's that we don't recycle
them.

Logistic challenge

Even if we only consider livestock manure, there is enough natural
fertilizer available to sustain almost 7 billion people. There is also
no taboo when it comes to utilising animal manure, so why don't we use
it? Nutrients recovered as animal manure and applied to agricultural
lands were estimated globally at a mere 34 million tonnes of nitrogen
(28 percent of total) and 8.8 million tonnes of phosphates (15 percent)
in 1996. The amount wasted thus equals (for nitrogen) or surpasses (for
phosphates) artificial fertilizer production.

This is the consequence of an industrial and intensive meat and dairy
production system that is operating on a global scale. In many countries
cattle eats fodder that is produced on the other side of the world. So,
in order to close the loop, we would have to ship the manure back to
where the fodder comes from. The FAO
[writes](ftp://ftp.fao.org/docrep/fao/010/a0701e/a0701e00.pdf) (pdf):

> "Even if livestock is raised on the same continent as where its feed
> is grown, the scale and geographical concentration of industrial
> feedstock production causes gross imbalances that hamper manure
> recycling options. High labour and transport costs often limit the use
> of manure as organic fertilizer to the direct vicinity of the
> production facilities."

> If we recycle our own waste products, we have to ship them back from
> the place of food consumption to the place of food production

Of course, the same can be said of human manure. Just like livstock,
humans are geographically concentrated in large cities with no farmland
in sight. Just like livestock, we eat food that is often produced far
away from where we live. This means that if we choose to collect
humanure, we have to ship it back from the place of food consumption to
the place of food production. Consequently, recycling nutrient elements
would bring along a massive logistic system consisting of trucks, trains
and ships transporting dung (or pipelines transporting sewage) all over
the world.



We are not saying that every ounce of dung should be sent back to the
place where the food was grown - this is impossible and ridiculous. What
counts is that there is a balance between import and export of
nutrients. Countries that export food should also choose to import
(other) food, instead of dung, yielding the same result and increasing
the dietary variety. All we would essentially need is a sophisticated
nutrient accounting system.

Decentralisation of the human population

The fundamental solution, of course, is to produce food more locally.
This would not only do away with the shipping of manure, but also with
the shipping of food. If livestock production would be geographically
more diversified and mixed with cropland, all the animal manure could be
used and artificial fertilizers would not be needed.

If cities were smaller and distributed more uniformly throughout farming
country, the logistics of returning humanure to farmland would be
greatly simplified. Of course, this 'decentralisation' of the human
population goes against the notion that densely populated cities are
more sustainable than a more uniformly distributed population. The
challenge may not be to abandon Suburbia, but to make it more
self-sufficient.

Â© Kris De Decker (edited by Shameez Joubert)

Â© Illustrations in red & black: [Diego
Marmolejo](http://ddidak.blogspot.com/) for low-tech magazine.

Many Thanks to [Sietz Leeflang](http://www.de12ambachten.nl/), inventor
of the [Nonolet](http://www.de12ambachten.nl/engnonolet.html) (an urban
composting toilet - [building
plans](http://www.de12ambachten.nl/eng-greentech/07-12%20diynonolet.html)),
who spent two years convincing me to write this epos on shit, and
referred me to most documents listed below. Sietz also inspired me to
write about [oven
stoves]({filename}/posts/tile-stoves.md) (which
took considerably less effort).

![](https://www.paypalobjects.com/en_US/i/scr/pixel.gif){width="1"
height="1"}

### Sources

-   "[Farmers of Forty
    Centuries](http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924073872685)", F.H.
    King (1911)&mdash;dung recycling in china, korea and japan
-   "[Science and civilization in
    China](http://www.nri.org.uk/science.html)", Vol VI:2, Joseph
    Needham (1984)&mdash;idem
-   "[De geschiedenis van de techniek in Nederland - de wording van een
    moderne samenleving 1800 - 1890, deel
    2](http://www.dbnl.org/tekst/lint011gesc02_01/index.php)", H.W.
    Lindsen (1993)&mdash;the liernur system (in Dutch)
-   "[Feed or Feedback: Agriculture, Population Dynamics and the State
    of the
    Planet](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/905727048X?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=905727048X)![](http://www.assoc-amazon.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=as2&o=1&a=905727048X){width="1"
    height="1"}", Duncan Brown, 2003&mdash;the nutrient cycle and how to
    restore it (great book!)
-   "[The history of sanitary sewers](http://www.sewerhistory.org/)"
    (website)&mdash;the liernur system and other early sewer systems
-   "[Proposed plan for a sewerage system, and for the disposal of
    sewage](http://www.sewerhistory.org/articles/design/abp3/article.pdf)",
    PDF, Samuel M. Gray (1884)&mdash;the technical options at the end of
    the 19th century
-   "[Humanure Handbook](http://humanurehandbook.com/contents.html)",
    Joseph Jenkins (2005 - third edition)&mdash;diy
-   "[The nitrogen dilemma: is America fertilizing
    disaster?](http://www.grist.org/article/series/the-n2-dilemma-is-america-fertilizing-disaster)",
    Tom Philpott, Grist (2010) - inorganic fertilizers
-   "[Livestock's long
    shadow](ftp://ftp.fao.org/docrep/fao/010/a0701e/a0701e00.pdf)", PDF,
    Food and Agriculture Organisation (2006) - figures of livestock dung
    production
-   "[Production and use of
    potassium](http://www.ipni.net/ppiweb/bcrops.nsf/$webindex/02FB2A65B5DE395D852568F000674947/$file/98-3p06.pdf)",
    PDF (1998)
-   "[Inorganic phosphorus and potassium production and
    reserves](http://www.ipni.net/ppiweb/bcrops.nsf/$webindex/ADC8E71EF80F70D785256BDB004837F8/$file/02-2p06.pdf)",
    PDF, T.L. Roberts and W.M. Stewart, in "Better Crops" (2002)
-   "[Environmental aspects of phosphate and potash
    mining](http://www.elaw.org/system/files/PotashMining.pdf)", PDF,
    UNEP (2001)
-   "[Peak
    Phosphorus](http://www.foreignpolicy.com/articles/2010/04/20/peak_phosphorus?hidecomments=yes)",
    James Elser & Stuart White, Foreign Policy (2010)
-   "[Scientists warn of lack of vita phosphorus as biofuels raise
    demand](http://www.foodandwatersecurity.net/data/172.pdf)", Times
    Online, June 23, 2008
-   "[The voyages and adventures of Ferdinand Mendez Pinto, a Portugal,
    during his travels for the space of one and 20 years in the kingdom
    of Ethiopia, China, Tartaria,
    etcetera](http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924011271826)",
    Ferdinand Mendez Pinto (1583).

Related articles  



-   [Bring back the
    horses]({filename}/posts/horses-agricult.md)
-   [Sewage powered cable
    trains]({filename}/posts/water-powered-cable-trains.md)
-   [Leave the algae
    alone]({filename}/posts/algae-fuel-biof.md)
-   [The bright future of solar powered
    factories]({filename}/posts/solar-powered-factories.md):
    we need a renewable source of heat energy
-   [How to downsize a transport
    network]({filename}/posts/the-chinese-wheelbarrow.md):
    the Chinese wheelbarrow

