Title: The solar envelope: how to heat and cool cities without fossil fuels
Date: 2012-03-24 20:52
Author: Kris De Decker
Category: Low-tech Solutions
Slug: solar-oriented-cities-1-the-solar-envelope
Status: published


/
[2]({filename}/posts/solar-oriented-cities-2-solar-access-in-19th-century-cities.md)
/
[3]({filename}/posts/solar-oriented-cities-3-housing-density.md)

Architects all over the world have demonstrated the usefulness of
buildings which are heated and cooled by design rather than by fossil
fuel energy. What has received much less attention, however, is the
possibility of applying this approach to entire urban neighbourhoods and
cities.

Designing a single, often free-standing, passive solar house is quite
different from planning a densely populated city where each building is
heated and cooled using only natural energy sources. And yet, if we want
passive solar design to be more than just a curiosity, this is exactly
what we need. Modern research, which combines ancient knowledge with
fast computing techniques, shows that passive solar cities are a
realistic option, allowing for surprisingly high population densities.

Illustration by [Diego Marmolejo](http://ddidak.blogspot.com.es/) for
Low-tech Magazine.


Passive solar design requires the knowledge to design and orientate
buildings so that they can be heated by the sun. Coupled with other
low-tech solutions such as [thermal
underwear]({filename}/posts/body-insulation-thermal-underwear.md),
[heated
clothing]({filename}/posts/heat-your-clothes-not-your-house.md)
and [tile
stoves]({filename}/posts/tile-stoves.md),
passive solar design could all but eliminate the use of fossil fuels and
biomass for heating buildings throughout large parts of the world.
Indirectly, a passive solar house can also cancel the energy
requirements for cooling and ventilation (passive cooling), and for
lighting during the day. Of course, passive solar buildings can be
outfitted with solar water heaters and PV solar panels, further reducing
the use of unsustainable energy resources.

Passive solar design does not involve any new technology. In fact, it
has been around for thousands of years, and even predates the use of
glass windows. For most of human history, buildings were adapted to the
local climate through a consideration of their location, orientation and
shape, as well as the appropriate building materials. This resulted in
many vernacular building styles in different parts of the world. In
contrast, most modern buildings look the same wherever they stand. They
are made from the same materials, they follow forms that are driven by
fashion rather than by climate, and are most often randomly located and
oriented, indifferent to the path of the sun and the prevailing wind
conditions.


buildings rely on a massive supply of cheap fossil fuels for heating,
cooling, and lighting. Take the supply of cheap fossil fuels away, and
they become completely uninhabitable for most of the year: they are too
cold, too hot or too dark. This radical change in architectural design
was caused by both the arrival of cheap and abundant energy sources and
the resultant urbanisation (See [part
2]({filename}/posts/solar-oriented-cities-2-solar-access-in-19th-century-cities.md)).
The Industrial Revolution relocated millions of people from the
countryside to the cities. When most of us lived and worked on farms or
in hamlets, it was fairly easy to orientate one's house towards the sun.
In an urban environment, however, building orientation is generally
determined by street layout, and one building can easily overshadow
another. High-rise buildings further complicate solar access.

From solar oriented buildings to solar oriented cities


does not mean that passive solar design could not be applied to entire
cities. It just takes more sophisticated planning. Solar access to an
individual building is determined by only four factors: latitude (the
distance north or south from the equator), slope, building shape and
orientation.

Solar access to a city (or any other built-up environment) is determined
by *seven* factors: the four just mentioned, plus the height of the
buildings, the width of the streets, and the orientation of the streets
(See [part
2]({filename}/posts/solar-oriented-cities-2-solar-access-in-19th-century-cities.md)).
Providing ventilation in an urban environment is determined by the same
factors, with the exception that latitude is replaced by prevailing wind
conditions.

While most research in passive solar design during the 1970s was
directed at individual buildings, one man began forty years of research
into solar oriented cities: Ralph Knowles, professor emeritus at the
USC's School of Architecture and author of three fascinating books on
the topic
([1974](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0262610256/ref=as_li_tf_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0262610256)![](http://www.assoc-amazon.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=as2&o=1&a=0262610256){.uuhwewivwknfowzjrmyi
width="1" height="1"},
[1981](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/026261040X/ref=as_li_tf_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=026261040X)![](http://www.assoc-amazon.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=as2&o=1&a=026261040X){.uuhwewivwknfowzjrmyi
width="1" height="1"},
[2006](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/1597260509/ref=as_li_tf_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=1597260509)![](http://www.assoc-amazon.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=as2&o=1&a=1597260509){.uuhwewivwknfowzjrmyi
width="1" height="1"}).

Knowles developed and refined a method that strikes an optimal balance
between population density and solar access: the "Solar Envelope". It is
a set of imaginary boundaries, enclosing a building site, that regulate
development in relation to the sun's motion&mdash;which is predictable
throughout the seasons for any place on Earth.

> Buildings within the solar envelope do not overshadow neighbouring
> buildings during critical energy-receiving periods of the day and the
> year


within this imaginary container do not overshadow neighbouring buildings
during critical energy-receiving periods of the day and the season, and
assure solar access for both passive and active solar systems. On the
one hand, the solar envelope allows architects to design with sunlight
without fear that their ideas will be cancelled out by future buildings.
On the other hand, the solar envelope recognizes the need for
development and high population densities, by defining the largest
container of space that would not cast shadows off-site at specified
times of the day.

Knowles and his students have reached densities that are far above the
average in European and American cities (See [part
3]({filename}/posts/solar-oriented-cities-3-housing-density.md)),
with the exception of high-rise centers such as Manhattan.

Modification of traditional zoning practices

The solar envelope is actually a relatively simple modification of
existing zoning practices, which also set imaginary boundaries that
enclose a building site&mdash;determining the maximum height, width and
depth of future buildings. The most rigid approach in conventional
zoning prescribes maximum building heights, set in feet or metres,
number of floors, or both. A second, more flexible approach, sets limits
based on a ratio between developeable land and floor area within the
building on that site. For example, a floor-to-area ratio (FAR) of 6
means that architects can develop 6 times the developeable square
footage of land within the setbacks. They could cover the entire site
with 6 stories, or cover only half of the site with 12 stories, for
example.

Although both zoning methods offer a certain degree of solar access in a
city, they are far from optimal. The main problem is that they do not
design building orientation with its solar impact in mind, which can be
as critical as building height. For example, a skyscraper with its broad
flat sides facing east and west will cast a relatively small midday
winter shadow, while one oriented with its broad flat sides facing north
and south will shade a much larger area during the sunniest periods of
the day (illustration above). Taking orientation into account would
greatly improve solar access for surrounding buildings, without
sacrificing housing density.

The geometry of the solar envelope

Compared to conventional zoning practices, the solar envelope produces a
different geometry&mdash;the limits of the envelope derive their vertical
dimensions from the sun's daily and seasonal movements. Thus, while
conventional zoning envelopes are shaped like a box, the solar envelope
has both vertical and sloping spaces.


envelopes on the Spanish street grid system in Los Angeles. Ralph
Knowles.

As a result, the buildings and city blocks that fill these imaginary
solar envelopes are more likely to have unique shapes. One side of a
building would not look like the other, nor would each side of the
street. In the northern hemisphere, development would tend to be lower
on the south side of a street than on the north where a major southern
exposure would be preserved. Streets take on a directional character
where solar orientation is clearly recognised.


within the solar envelopes shown above. Ralph Knowles.

Adjacent buildings can meet each other gently, rather than abruptly,
across property sidelines. Tall buildings would group together at the
site's southwestern end, and those of moderate height at the
northeastern end, with the shortest buildings taking up the site's
midsection. Buildings on corner lots will be taller because their
shadows can extend accross the street in two directions instead of one.


designs under the solar envelope are characterised by roof terraces,
courtyards and clerestories. Ralph Knowles.

Within the solar envelope, certain architectural characteristics have
great consistency. For instance, roof terraces appear where the sloping
sides of the envelope intersect the rectilineair geometry of buildings.
Courtyards are another crucial element, as they introduce sunlight and
heat to deep interiors. Clerestories allow for the penetration of winter
sun down stairways to enliven otherwise darker, lower floors. Sunscreens
and porches are everywhere, keeping the sun out in summer.


solar access

The solar envelope is not only defined by the path of the sun, but also
by fixed parameters set by the designer. Choosing these will determine
the balance between solar access and development potential.


most important choice is the definition of the hours during which we
want to avoid casting shadows on adjacent land&mdash;the 'cut-off times'.
The longer the period of daily solar access, the smaller the
developeable volume under the envelope. Obviously, setting the cut-off
times as equal to the period between sunrise and sunset would not work,
because in that case few or any buildings could be constructed. For
passive solar design, a minimum of 4 to 6 hours per day in winter is
considered practical, depending on the climate.

The duration of solar access could also be set by a minimum percentage
of available energy instead of determining a minimum hours of sunshine.
In that case, cut-off times would change over the course of the year.
Another parameter to be set is the 'shadow fence'. It determines the
minimum height to which solar access has to be assured; for instance
zero, 3 or 6 metres above street level. For example, one can choose to
allow shadowing of garages and shops in order to improve the density
under the solar envelope.

What about existing buildings?

Solar envelopes can be designed for individual buildings or as a single
envelope for a group of houses, a neighbourhood, a district or even an
entire city. This is a rather straightforward process when a site is
being designed from scratch, but often current buildings will complicate
the generation of a solar envelope. When the solar envelope is applied
in line with existing buildings, new construction would always be shaped
and proportioned with reference to the old. Each new phase of
development changes the surroundings and thus the context within which
the next envelope is generated.


solar envelope casting its maximum shadow in winter. The smaller,
previously built houses retain their solar access. Ralph Knowles.


of the building designs within the solar envelope shown above. Ralph
Knowles.

It is important to note that the solar envelope only protects
neighbouring properties. It is the architect who must ensure solar
access to the buildings within the envelope, tackling problems of
overshadowing within the envelope itself. For larger sites, the volume
of a solar envelope is therefore larger than the volume of the buildings
that actually fill it, at least when solar access is assured to all
dwellings on site.

Solar oriented cities in Antiquity

Knowles' research draws on ancient knowledge, most notably the solar
planned cities in Ancient Greece and the solar communities of the
Ancient Pueblo People in what is today the Southwestern United States.
The Ancient Greeks built entire cities which were optimal for solar
exposure.


street
plan](http://krisdedecker.typepad.com/.a/6a00e0099229e8883301630029a9c1970d-150wi "Olynthus street plan")](http://krisdedecker.typepad.com/.a/6a00e0099229e8883301630029a9c1970d-pi)In
the fifth century BC, for example, a neighbourhood for about 2500 people
was built in the city of Olynthus. The streets were built perpendicular
to each other, running long in the east-west direction (the horizontal
streets shown in the plan), so that all houses (five on each side of the
street) could be built with southern exposure.

A gridirion street plan oriented at the cardinal points was not new at
the time, and neither is it proof of a design aimed at maximum solar
exposure. But the Greeks did more. In "*[A Golden Thread: 2500 Years of
Solar Architecture and
Technology](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0442240058/ref=as_li_tf_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0442240058)*![](http://www.assoc-amazon.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=as2&o=1&a=0442240058){.uuhwewivwknfowzjrmyi
width="1" height="1"}", Ken Butti and John Perlin note that all houses
were consistently built around a south-facing courtyard:

*"The houses that faced south on the street and south to the sun were
entered through the court, straight from the street. The houses that
faced north to the street and south to the sun were entered through a
passageway that led from the street through the main body of the house
and into the court, from which access was gained to all other spaces."*


keeping with the democratic ethos of the period, the height of buildings
was strictly limited so that each courtyard received an equal amount of
sunshine:

*"In winter, rays from the sun traveling low across the southern sky
streamed across the south-facing courts, throgh the portico, and into
the house - heating the main rooms. The north walls were made of adobe
bricks one and a half feet thick, which kept out the cold north winds of
winter."*

Another obvious example of Ancient Greek solar planning was Priene
(illustration above), rebuilt in 350 BC and located in present-day
Turkey. The city had about 4000 inhabitants living in 400 houses. Its
buildings and street plan were similar to those in Olynthus, but because
the city was built on the slope of a steep mountain, many of the fifteen
secondary streets (running north-south) were actually stairways. The
seven main avenues were terraced on an east-west axis.

Native Americans

The Ancient Pueblo People or "Anasazi" built a number of sophisticated
solar oriented communities during the 11th and 12th centuries AD in what
is now the Southwestern United States: Long House at Mesa Verde, Pueblo
Bonito in Northern Mexico and the "sky city" of Acoma.



Illustration of Acoma Pueblo, by Gary S. Shigemura (from "Energy and
Form", Ralph Knowles).

These communities followed a different building style than that of the
Greeks. The Ancient Pueblo People constructed terraced buildings of up
to three floors high. These were buildings that would fit perfectly in a
solar envelope with slanting lines. Acoma pueblo (illustration above) is
one example of these orderly, solar planned communities. It consists of
three rows of houses built along streets running east and west, so that
each building faces south. The streets that separate the houses have a
width that allows winter shadows to cover the whole of the adjoining
street, stopping just before the following row of buildings.



Heliodon

Knowles' research combines the best elements of these historical designs
and incorporates modern technology that greatly facilitates the
generation of a solar envelope. The
[heliodon](http://www.hpd-online.com/heliodons.php), invented in the
1930s, is a contraption that creates a geometrical relationship between
an architectural scale model and (a representation of) the sun. More
recently, software versions of the heliodon have made the technology
much more affordable, while allowing for the fast generation of even
very complex solar envelopes.

On larger sites in particular, and when already existing buildings
complicate the generation of a solar envelope, the available computer
software saves time and can result in more building volume.

Continue reading: 1 /
[2]({filename}/posts/solar-oriented-cities-2-solar-access-in-19th-century-cities.md)
/
[3]({filename}/posts/solar-oriented-cities-3-housing-density.md).

Kris De Decker (edited by Deva Lee)

