Title: The solar envelope: how to heat and cool cities without fossil fuels
Date: 2012-03-24 20:53
Author: Kris De Decker
Category: Low-tech Solutions
Slug: solar-oriented-cities-2-solar-access-in-19th-century-cities
Status: published

[1]({filename}/posts/solar-oriented-cities-1-the-solar-envelope.md)
/ 2 /
[3]({filename}/posts/solar-oriented-cities-3-housing-density.md)



The Ancient Greeks resorted to passive solar design mainly because of
acute firewoord shortages, but there was an additional reason: they
believed that solar heat was good for human health. When solar access in
cities regained attention in the western world during the urbanisation
of the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, health was the one and
only motivation.

The Industrial Revolution brought plenty of cheap energy, but also
plenty of disease. Millions of people ended up in overcrowded buildings
in narrow streets. These neighbourhoods were soon ravaged by lethal
epidemics such as tuberculosis, cholera, smallpox and typhoid fever.
Most medical experts were convinced that these illnesses were caused by
a lack of fresh air and sunshine.

In his 1893 book "[*Healthy
Hospitals*](http://archive.org/details/healthyhospitals00galt)", Douglas
Galton wrote:

*"Second only to air, is light and sunshine essential for growth and for
health; and it is of Natures most powerful assistants in enabling the
body to throw off those conditions which we call disease. Not only
daylight, but sunlight; indeed, fresh air must be sun-warmed,
sun-penetrated air. The sunshine of a December day has been recently
shown to kill the spores of the anthrax bacillus."*

Illustration: [Diego Marmolejo](http://ddidak.blogspot.com.es/).


In 1854, John Snow famously observed that an outbreak of cholera could
be traced back to the drinking of contaminated water at a public well,
proving that the most devastating disease was not caused by foul air or
a lack of sunshine but by germs in drinking water. However, it would
take half a century more before his theory was generally accepted.
Furthermore, some ailments were indeed cured or alleviated by sunshine
and fresh air. For example, rickets, a bone deforming disease endemic
among children in nineteenth-century cities, was caused by a lack of
sunshine.

At the turn of the century, doctors in Europe and in the US began
promoting sunbathing to help prevent the disease. Interestingly, while
Knowles initiated his research into the solar envelope purely for means
of energy conversion, he gradually changed his priorities, aiming to
improve the quality of life instead, of which he considers energy
conversion to be just a part (see his [latest
book](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/1597260509/ref=as_li_tf_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=1597260509)
in particular).

Solar access in nineteenth-century cities

In order to ensure solar access and fresh air, many cities in Europe and
in the United States enacted a variety of building codes between the
1850s and the 1930s. Although Knowles does not talk about this period,
it is interesting to compare these earlier zoning practices to the solar
envelope. Most of the building codes were related to building height and
street width. Boston architect William Atkinson, who was one of the
advocates of passive solar design at the time, saw the limitations of
these codes and pointed out that building shape was equally important --
controlling it could actually improve development potential and solar
access alike.

In his 1912 book "*[The Orientation of Buildings, or Planning for
Sunlight](http://www.archive.org/details/orientationofbui00atki)*", he
writes:


method of limiting the height of buildings by a horizontal plane, either
at a fixed height, or at a height proportional to the width of the
street, is simple in application but is not scientific, since it assumes
that what is the proper height for the front wall or facade is also the
proper height for the rear portions of the building."*

*"Whereas, as a matter of fact, the rear portions may well be allowed to
rise to a greater height, in proportion to their distance back from the
street line. The height of the building should be limited by a slanting
line drawn from the opposite side of the street at a certain angle."*



Atkinson was inspired by the 1902 building laws of Paris (an adaptation
of the original building codes made by Haussmann), which not only
contained rules about street width and building height, but also
introduced a code regulating building shape. The illustration above
(taken from Atkinson's book) shows that the facade of a Paris building
(the vertical A-A line) could not be higher than 20 metres, while the
attics above (of which the height was also determined by street width
but could not surpass 10 metres) were curved.

This made it more likely for sunlight to penetrate the lower parts of
the building on the other side of the street, while maximizing housing
density. England's capital had somewhat similar building codes since the
[1894 London Building
Act](http://www.archive.org/details/londonbuildingac00fletrich), though
prescribing slanting roofs instead of curved ones (illustration on the
left). The tiered skyscrapers that appeared in the US following the
[1916 Standard Zoning Enabling
Act](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1916_Zoning_Resolution)also regulated
building shape, although the sheer height of the buildings was
unfavourable for solar access.

The Barcelona Eixample

The most interesting example of nineteenth-century solar city planning
is the Barcelona "Eixample" (Catalan for "enlargement" or "expansion"),
designed by Ildefons Cerdà i Sunyer. The Barcelona Eixample (home to the
[Sagrada
Familia](http://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Templo_Expiatorio_de_la_Sagrada_Familia)
and other famous Gaudí monuments) can be considered the largest
solar-planned neighbourhood in existence. Moreover, its history
exemplifies the tension between solar access and developmental needs.



Unlike Baron George-Eugène Haussmann in Paris, Cerdà did not have to
demolish Barcelona to adapt the city to the massive immigration flow of
the period. Medieval Barcelona (the large dark blob on the map below)
was surrounded by a large open plain with only a few small villages at
the outskirts (also in black). In the 1850s, Cerdà designed a large
'checkerboard' street plan surrounding the old city centre and annexing
the periferial towns. The neighbourhood, which today has an area of 7.46
km2, consists of streets 20 metres wide (65.5 ft), intersected by a few
boulevards 50 metres wide (164 ft), and very large city blocks measuring
113 x 113 metres (370 x 370 ft).



Cerdà intended to maximize solar access (and ventilation) to every
apartment in four ways. Firstly, he limited building height to 16 metres
(52.5 ft) for streets 20 metres wide. Furthermore, he mandated that city
blocks could only be built up on two instead of four sides, either
parallel to each other or in the form of an L (illustration on the
right, below). This enabled the creation of large interior spaces and
introduced sunlight and fresh air at both sides of each building.

> The Barcelona Eixample can be considered the largest solar planned
> neighbourhood in existence today


all city blocks have truncated corners, further improving solar access.
Lastly, he decided not to lay the street grid on the cardinal points,
but diagonal to it. As we will see shortly, this gave all apartments
access to sunlight during the day, while offering all streets shadow
throughout the day.


the truncated corners and the orientation of the streets survived one
hundred and fifty years of history. Cerdà's plan received much criticism
at the time. The main reproach was that the design wasted too much
valuable building space and thus money.

Within years, all four sides of every octagonal city block were built
up. Even most of the smaller interior spaces that resulted from this
were filled, albeit with low buildings so that solar access at the rear
facades remained more or less intact. Gradually, the laws regarding
building height were relaxed, from the original 16 metres (52 ft) to
almost 30 metres (98 ft).


as can be seen in the diagram on the right, solar access was retained on
all floors of the buildings on the other side of the street by placing
the top floors somewhat further back&mdash;in fact, producing a terraced
building similar in shape to those of the Native Americans (See part 1).
In this way, developers looking for financial profit actually improved
housing density without negatively impacting solar access.

The terraced upper buildings and the truncated corners in Barcelona, as
well as the curved roofs in Paris and the slanted roofs in London, can
all be considered embryonic steps towards Knowles' solar envelope.
However, he improved the concept substantially in two ways. Firstly, he
applies the idea of the sloping line to the whole building, not just the
roof or the upper floors. Secondly, his slanting lines coincide
precisely with the rays of the sun, which was not necessarily the case
in these earlier examples. To add to this, the earlier building codes
produced monotonous architectural forms and street views, while the
buildings under the solar envelope can be diverse, depending on their
specific location and surroundings.

The solar envelope and street orientation

The size and shape of a solar envelope is influenced by the orientation
of the streets. In the US, city layout is usually based on orderly
subdivisions that have geometricised the land. Typically, throughout the
midwest and the west, streets run in line with the cardinal points so
that rectangular blocks extend in the east-west and north-south
direction of the Jeffersonian grid (or US Land Ordinance, enforced in
1785).

In the southern US, as well as in large parts of Latin America, a
similar grid appears, with the difference that it is oriented diagonally
at the cardinal points, with streets extending northeast-southwest and
northwest-southeast. These grids were laid out according to the Law of
the Indies, a manual for the construction and administration of colonial
communities compiled by the King of Spain in 1573.


envelopes and housing project on curving streets. Viewed from the south.
Ralph Knowles.*

In Europe there are relatively few gridirion city lay-outs to be found.
The existence of older city fabrics, resulting from centuries of
unregulated growth during the middle ages and the Renaissance,
constrained experiments with urban planning. Many European cities were
'modernised' at the turn of the twentieth century, by laying out wide
streets and boulevards that cut through the older parts of the city -
Paris being the most (in)famous example - but basically randomness still
rules. The solar envelope can be applied to all possible street layouts,
even if they're chaotic, with differing results.



William Atkinson: avoid east-west, north-south

In "*The Orientation of Buildings, or Planning for Sunlight*", William
Atkinson devotes a chapter to the importance of street orientation for
solar planning. He argues that the Jeffersonian grid should be avoided
in order to provide optimal solar access for cities. Instead, he follows
Cerdà and backs the Spanish grid:

*"When streets are laid out at right angles to each other according to
the checkerboard plan, the best distribution of sunlight is obtained
when one series of streets runs northeast-southwest and the other
northwest-southeast. It is unfortunate that in so many cases where the
'checkerboard' plan has been adopted, the streets have been laid out
north-south and east-west, which is the worst arrangement possible."*

Atkinson agrees that "if we were to base our judgment wholly on the
amount of sunlight received by windows, we should conclude that the best
position for \[a\] building is with its long axis placed east and west".
However, he saw an important disadvantage with this orientation: it
involves an area of "complete shadow" on the north side of the building,
during one half of the year (autumn to spring), while in the case of a
building with its diagonal upon the meridian all sides receive sunlight
throughout the year. The same goes for the streets:


an east-west street the surface of the street receives no sunlight at
all during six months of the year, and the buildings on the south side
of the street are in perpetual shadow. In contrast, when the streets are
oriented diagonal upon the cardinal points, the buildings shade the
surface of the ground much less".*

Ralph Knowles: it depends

Knowles did most of his research in Los Angeles, which makes it easy to
compare both grid patterns&mdash;LA consists of both an older Spanish grid
and a newer Jeffersonian grid (illustration on the right). Knowles
acknowledges that the Jeffersonian grid is not an ideal solution:

*"Streets that run east-west in a built-up area will tend to be shadowed
during all of a winter day. The streets thus remain dark and cold. By
contrast, streets that run north-south are lighted and warmed during the
midday. In summer, streets that run north-south will be shadowed in the
morning and the afternoon, but will receive the full force of the midday
sun."*

*"From the viewpoint of solar orientation, the Jeffersonian grid leaves
something to be desired. Its east west streets are too dark and cold in
winter, its north south streets too bright and hot in summer. In Los
Angeles, the older Spanish grid seems to have advantages regarding
street qualities of light and heat. During the winter, every street
receives direct light and heat from the sun somewhere between 9 am and 3
pm, the six hours of greatest radiation. Every street has the advantage
of some shadow during most of the summer day."*

> The grid layout best suited for both maximum solar access and maximum
> building density is one with rectangular blocks running long in the
> east-west direction


the other hand, the classic grid plan oriented at the cardinal points
also has benefits. Knowles demonstrates that the solar envelope over a
city block oriented on the cardinal points will contain more
developeable volume than one over a diagonal block:

*"Generally, the most height, and hence volume, are attainable at either
of the two block orientations within the Jeffersonian grid, and the
least volume is attainable at about the angular orientation of the
Spanish grid. The street's gain in sunlight thus appears to be the
developer's lose. Other design values can dictate grid orientation but,
for volume alone, the Jeffersonian grid has the advantages."*

Within the Jeffersonian grid, sites oriented in the east-west direction
allow a greater volume of development under the solar envelope than
sites running north-south. Knowles calculated that, given the same site
shape and proportions of 1:3, a building site oriented long on an
east-west axis will generate 40 percent more volume and 400 percent more
south face over the north-south orientation.


short, the grid layout best suited for both maximum solar access and
maximum building density is one with rectangular blocks running long in
the east-west direction - as was the case in the Ancient Greek solar
communities and in Acoma Pueblo.

Combining the best of both grids

One problem remains, though. Within our cities, the orientation of
houses is toward the street rather than toward the sun. If a street runs
east-west, only the buildings on the north side of the street will have
south exposure at their street front (providing that the buildings on
the south side of the street do not shadow them). The buildings on the
south side of the street have south exposure only at their rear facades.
If a street runs north-south (and a grid system having desirable
east-west streets will by definition have north-south streets, too),
none of the buildings will have the ideal south exposure.

To solve this problem, Knowles reverts to the solution provided by the
Ancient Greeks, using courtyards and alleys that are curved out from the
middle of the site (See [part
1]({filename}/posts/solar-oriented-cities-1-the-solar-envelope.md)).
Moreover, he shows that the concept can be further improved upon. This
can be seen in the Bunker Hill Project, in which a solar envelope was
calculated for a large vacant lot on the Spanish grid in downtown Los
Angeles. One of the building designs made to fit this solar envelope,
consists of an internal and separate street composed of a sequence of
large and small squares, cascading diagonally across the site from its
higher edge to its lower edge.


Bunker Hill project: the solar envelope

During the midday hours, the sun sees down the entire length of the
interior street because it runs more nearly in a north-south direction,
diagionally across the street. At 3 pm in winter, the public space is
still in sunlight, as is the entire length of the interior street on its
southeastern side. "Such sensitive tuning of the building's location and
form", writes Knowles, " combine the best aspects of both the Spanish
grid and the Jeffersonian grid."


Bunker Hill project: a building design that fits the solar envelope
above. Note the shadows, at 3 pm in winter.*

When aiming to combine the advantages of solar access and wind
conditions, similar compromises can be found. Knowles:

*"Sometimes complex sets of environmental forces act congruently so
that, for example, desirable sun and wind may come from the same
direction. In this fortunate circumstance, the building may be oriented
to catch both sun and wind on its broad south face and the building may
thus be open on that side. On the other hand, directional forces more
usually act incongruently, making choices necessary. The sun and wind
may come from different directions. Where choices exist, values must be
set. For example, the sun may be recognized through a primary locational
adaptation in which the whole building becomes oriented to the south.
Adaptation to a west wind would then be handled with a secondary form
mode in which the building's surface structure scoops in the wind for
natural ventilation."*

Continue reading:
[1]({filename}/posts/solar-oriented-cities-1-the-solar-envelope.md)
/ 2 /
[3]({filename}/posts/solar-oriented-cities-3-housing-density.md)
/
[Comments](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2012/03/solar-oriented-cities-1-the-solar-envelope.html#comments).

Kris De Decker (edited by Deva Lee)

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
