Title: The bright future of solar thermal powered factories
Date: 2011-07-26 02:26
Author: Kris De Decker
Category: Low-tech Solutions
Tags: passive solar, solar factories, solar power, solar thermal
Slug: solar-powered-factories
Status: published



Most of the talk about renewable energy is aimed at electricity
production. However, most of the energy we need is heat, which solar
panels and wind turbines cannot produce efficiently. To power industrial
processes like the making of chemicals, the smelting of metals or the
production of microchips, we need a renewable source of thermal energy.
Direct use of solar energy can be the solution, and it creates the
possibility to produce renewable energy plants using only renewable
energy plants, paving the way for a truly sustainable industrial
civilization.

  
Picture: [ARUN](http://www.clique.in/arun.html).

> The missing element in our sustainable energy strategy is a renewable
> source of heat energy

A large share of energy consumed worldwide is by heat. Cooking, space
heating and water heating dominate domestic energy consumption. In the
UK, these activities account for [85
percent](http://www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/statistics/publications/dukes/dukes.aspx)
of domestic energy use, in Europe for [89
percent](http://www.odyssee-indicators.org/reports/household/households.pdf)
and in the USA for [61
percent](http://www.eia.gov/consumption/residential/reports/electronics.cfm)
(excluding cooking).

Heat also dominates industrial energy consumption. In the UK, [76
percent](http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/+/http://www.berr.gov.uk/files/file11250.pdf)
of industrial energy consumption is heat. In Europe, this is [67
percent](http://www.estif.org/fileadmin/estif/content/policies/downloads/D23-solar-industrial-process-heat.pdf).
I could not find figures for the US and for the world as a whole, but
these percentages must be similar (and probably even higher on a
worldwide scale because many energy-intensive industries have been
outsourced to developing countries). Few things can be manufactured
without heat.

Solar panels and wind turbines are no producers of heat energy


The importance of heat in total energy consumption sharply contrasts
with our efforts to green the energy infrastructure. These are largely
aimed at renewable electricity production using wind turbines and solar
panels. Although it is perfectly possible to convert electricity into
heat, as in electric heaters or electric cookers, it is very inefficient
to do so.

It is often assumed that our energy problems are solved when renewables
reach 'grid parity' - the point at which they can generate electricity
for the same price as fossil fuels. But to truly compete with fossil
fuels, renewables must also reach '[thermal
parity](http://www.solarfire.org/The-Thermal-Problem)'.

Though today in some locations it may be as cheap to produce electricity
with wind or solar energy as with gas or coal, it still remains
significantly cheaper to produce heat with oil, gas or coal than with a
wind turbine or a solar panel. This is because it takes 2 to 3 kWh of
fossil fuel thermal energy to create 1 kWh of electricity, so it is at
least 2 to 3 times cheaper to make heat by simply burning the fossil
fuels directly than to use an electric renewable technology at grid
parity.

Manufacturing wind turbines and solar panels requires heat

This means that solar panels and wind turbines will have to become two
to three times cheaper than they are today in order to reach thermal
parity with fossil fuels. This might sound reasonably possible,
especially if you expect fossil fuel prices to rise. But consider this:
even though they are intended to replace fossil fuels, renewable energy
sources like wind turbines and solar panels are in fact dependent on a
continuous supply of fossil fuels.

Solar panels and wind turbines do not need fossil fuels to operate, but
they do [need fossil fuels for their
production]({filename}/posts/the-ugly-side-o.md).
You won't find any factory manufacturing PV solar panels or wind
turbines using energy from their own PV solar panels or wind turbines.
Why not? Because it would be 2 to 3 times more expensive to generate
heat with solar panels or wind turbines than with fossil fuels. Yet to
make solar panels and wind turbines, to produce steel and silicon for
instance, heat is what is most needed. This means that the production
costs of solar panels and wind turbines will be affected negatively by
rising fossil fuel prices.

> You won't find any factory manufacturing PV solar panels using energy
> from their own PV solar panels, because it would be 2 to 3 times more
> expensive to generate the heat required for producing steel and
> silicon

[](http://krisdedecker.typepad.com/.a/6a00e0099229e8883301538ff5ba6c970b-pi)

The same goes for batteries, which are an essential element of [electric
cars](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/electric-cars/) and renewable
electricity storage, and for many other modern green technologies, like
LEDs and heat pumps. They require heat for their production, and this
heat can be delivered at least 2 to 3 times cheaper by burning fossil
fuels than by using wind turbines or solar panels (cheap electricity
from hydropower plants is also an option, but has limited potential).
This is a fundamental problem, because we will have to produce new wind
turbines and solar panels every 20 to 30 years, and new batteries every
5 to 10 years.

Renewable source of heat energy

The missing element in our sustainable energy strategy is a renewable
source of thermal energy. Geothermal energy produces heat, but its
potential is limited to regions that have volcanoes. Biomass is another
option, but it faces [many
problems]({filename}/posts/algae-fuel-biof.md).
If we were to try to provide an important share of heat demand by
burning biomass, we would quickly come up against the limits of what the
planet can produce. There is only one source of heat energy left, and it
is a powerful and inexhaustible one: solar energy.

We tend to see solar energy as yet another way to generate electricity,
using photovoltaic panels or solar thermal power plants. But solar
energy can also be applied directly, without the intermediate step of
generating electricity. Basically, harvesting direct solar energy can
happen in two ways: by means of water-based [flat plate
collectors](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Solar_thermal_collector#Flat_plate_collectors)
or [evacuated tube
collectors](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Solar_thermal_collector#Evacuated_tube_collectors),
which collect solar radiation from all directions and can reach
temperatures of 120 °C (248 °F), and by means of [solar concentrator
collectors](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Concentrated_solar_power),
which track the sun, concentrate its radiation, and can generate much
higher temperatures. These can be [parabolic trough
systems](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parabolic_trough), [linear
concentrating Fresnel
collectors](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Compact_Linear_Fresnel_Reflector),
[parabolic dish
systems](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Solar_thermal#Dish_designs) or
[solar power
towers](http://www.google.com/url?sa=t&source=web&cd=1&ved=0CCAQFjAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fen.wikipedia.org%2Fwiki%2FSolar_power_tower&rct=j&q=solar%20power%20towers&ei=i5QkTsuFLouj-gb0xIm2Aw&usg=AFQjCNGFb24urlsAiW1aZPaeC0skNlMi-A&sig2=6AprD8HN-mfNI5aNwKLlPw&cad=rja).
Almost all of these technologies were developed at the turn of the 20th
century.

Solar thermal power versus solar thermal heat


The problem is that we mostly use this technology for the wrong purpose.
In today's solar thermal plants, solar energy is converted into steam
(via a steam boiler), which is then converted into electricity (via a
steam turbine that drives an electric generator).

This process is just as inefficient as converting electricity into heat:
two-thirds of energy gets lost when converted from steam to electricity.
This is one of the main reasons why the use of solar thermal energy to
produce electricity is only cost-effective in deserts.

> If were to use concentrated solar power to generate heat instead of
> converting this heat into electricity - a process in which two thirds
> of energy gets lost - the technology would be cost-effective anywhere
> on Earth

If we were to use solar thermal plants to generate heat instead of
converting this heat into electricity, the technology could deliver
energy 3 times cheaper than it does today and become cost-effective also
in less sunny regions. The crucial difference between solar thermal
electricity and other renewables producing electricity is that solar
thermal actually starts with heat energy. Thus, contrary to other
renewables, the cost of heat energy using the technology is far lower
than the cost of electricity, and so it can compete with burning fossil
fuels at the thermal level.

Low temperature solar heat

This can be demonstrated by flat plate collectors and evacuated tube
collectors, which are used for domestic hot water preparation and (to a
lesser extent) interior space heating. This technology is used without
any conversion losses and is cost-competitive with fossil fuels almost
anywhere on Earth. According to the [2011
update](http://www.iea-shc.org/publications/downloads/Solar_Heat_Worldwide-2011.pdf)
of the International Energy Agency's [Solar Heating and Cooling
Programme](http://www.iea-shc.org/) (IEA-SHC), solar thermal heat is now
the second most important renewable energy source following wind, and a
much more important energy source than photovoltaics and solar thermal
power plants. Almost 60 percent of solar thermal heat capacity can be
found in China and another 20 percent is in Europe. The US and Canada
(where the main application is to heat swimming pools) account for less
than 9 percent.



Sweden, Denmark, Spain, Germany and Austria have the most sophisticated
markets for different solar thermal applications, including large-scale
plants for district heating and a small but growing number of systems
for air conditioning and cooling (using an [absorption
chiller](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Absorption_heat_pump)). By the end
of 2009, 115 solar supported district heating networks and 11 solar
supported cooling systems were installed in Europe. Canada, Saudi Arabia
and Singapore have also built a few large-scale solar heat systems for
producing hot water, space heating and cooling.

The potential of solar heat for industrial processes

Without a doubt, solar heat for domestic purposes should continue to be
encouraged and a lot of potential remains. But it does not stop there.
According to a 2008 report (pdf), which analyses the situation in
Europe, the [potential for solar heat in industrial
processes](http://www.iea-shc.org/publications/downloads/task33-Potential_for_Solar_Heat_in_Industrial_Processes.pdf)
is even larger than in the domestic market. About 30 percent of
industrial heat demand in Europe is below 100 °C (212 °F), which could
be delivered by commercially available flat plate collectors (&lt; 80
°C) and evacuated tube collectors (&lt; 120 °C) currently used for
domestic purposes.

> Almost 60 percent of heat demand in Euopean industry could be covered
> by already available and cost-effective technology using an
> inexhaustible renewable energy source that has no ecological
> disadvantages whatsoever.

Another 27 percent of industrial heat demand requires medium
temperatures (100 to 400 °C or 212 to 752 °F), which could be reached by
improved versions of these collectors (up to 160 °C, see [this
document](http://www.iea-ship.org/documents/Medium_Temperature_Collectors_Task33-IV__email.pdf))
and by commercially available solar concentrator technologies now mostly
used for electricity production: parabolic troughs, parabolic dishes and
linear concentrating Fresnel collectors.



This means that at least 57 percent of heat demand in European industry
(or almost 40 percent of total industrial energy demand) could be
covered by available and cost-effective technology using an
inexhaustible renewable energy source that has no ecological
disadvantages whatsoever. The capital costs (and embodied energy) of
this would be much less than replacing a similar amount of fossil fuel
energy use with solar panels or wind turbines. And of course, it could
be done anywhere, not just in Europe.

Solar heat in industry: existing applications


At low and medium temperatures, solar heat can be used for industrial
processes in several ways. It can provide warm water for processes like
bottle washing or chemical processes. Secondly, it can provide hot air
for drying and baking processes, for instance in the food and paper
industries. Thirdly, it can generate steam that can be fed into steam
heat distribution networks, which are widely used in many industries.
The interesting thing is that in all these applications, the existing
industrial machinery and distribution infrastructure remains in place.
Only the energy source is replaced.

Some manufacturers have started marketing their solar concentrator
technologies for the use of heat generation in industry, in addition to
their application as electricity generators. Examples are
[Sopogy](http://sopogy.com/) (a Hawaian company that sells modular
parabolic trough systems - picture above), the [Solar Power
Group](http://www.solar-power-group.de/) (a German company that sells
linear concentrating Fresnel collectors) and
[HelioDynamics](http://www.hdsolar.com/) (an American seller offering
similar technology - picture below).


Installations for the use of solar industrial process heat are still
rare, but they exist. German heating systems manufacturer Viessmann
installed 260 m² of its own flat plate collectors on its factory in
France to provide hot water for a chemical process, taking a first step
towards producing renewable energy using renewable energy. A solar
thermal plant based on 1,900 m² of parabolic troughs provides steam for
a pharmaceutical plant in Egypt. A similar solar thermal plant was built
for a dairy plant in Greece. A food processing facility in California
has 5,000 m² of parabolic troughs to produce steam used in the
manufacturing process. Several industrial applications of solar heat
have been built in India, using both flat plate collectors and
concentrator technologies.

> At low and medium temperatures, solar heat can be applied to
> industrial processes using already existing machinery and heat
> distribution pipelines

[](http://krisdedecker.typepad.com/.a/6a00e0099229e88833015433d1b4ac970c-pi)

A solar concentrator system called
[ARUN](http://www.clique.in/arun.html) - a Fresnel parabolic reflector
with point focus that delivers temperatures from 80 to 400 °C - has been
installed in six industries, ranging from a dairy plant to an automobile
manufacturer (picture on the left). India also has several large solar
cooking facilities for community kitchens (schools, hospitals,
factories, religious centres). The largest one consists of [84 parabolic
dish
systems](http://wka3.de/bildergalerie/bildergalerie1/cgi-bin/einzeln_pix.pl?solar=1&bild=Unbenannt-34.jpg&stop=stop)
reaching temperatures of up to 650 °C and producing up to 38,500 meals
per day. The largest solar process heat application to date was recently
installed in Hangzhou, China, where 13,000 m² of solar collectors on the
roof of a textile factory provide hot water for a dyeing process. The
[Global Solar Thermal Energy Council](http://www.solarthermalworld.org/)
is continually updating its list of [new industrial
applications](http://www.solarthermalworld.org/taxonomy/term/528?module=browse)
of solar heat.

Renewables building renewables

The remaining 43 percent of industrial heat demand in Europe is above
400 °C (752 °F). These include many of the industrial processes that we
need to manufacture renewable energy sources (wind turbines, solar
panels, flat plate collectors and solar concentrators) as well as other
green technologies (like LEDs, batteries and bicycles). Examples include
the production of glass (requiring temperatures up to 1,575 °C) and
cement (1,450 °C), the recycling of aluminum (660 °C) and steel (1,520
°C), the production of steel (1,800 °C) and aluminum (2,000 °C) from
mined ores, the firing of ceramics (1,000 to 1,400 °C) and the
manufacturing of silicon microchips and solar cells (1,900°C ).

> Solar furnaces can reach temperatures up to 3,500 °C (6,332 °F),
> enough to produce microchips, solar cells, carbon nanotubes, hydrogen
> and all metals

These temperatures can be achieved by solar concentrator technology.
Linear reflectors (parabolic trough systems and linear concentrating
Fresnel collectors) are limited to temperatures of about 400 °C, but
point concentrators can reach higher temperatures. These include
parabolic dish systems, solar power towers, and solar furnaces - which
are basically a combination of power towers and parabolic dish systems.


Solar furnaces can produce temperatures up to 3,500 °C (6,332 °F),
enough to manufacture microchips, solar cells, carbon nanotubes,
hydrogen and all metals (including tungsten which has a melting point of
3,400 °C). These temperatures can be achieved in just a few seconds -
see this [short
video](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8tt7RG3UR4c&feature=player_embedded)
of a solar furnace melting steel. The most powerful solar furnace is the
one [at Odeillo in
France](http://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Four_solaire_d%27Odeillo), built in
1970, which concentrates the light of the sun 10,000 times and has a
power output of 1 MW.


than 60 heliostats (only one is seen on the picture above, in the lower
righthand corner) direct the rays of the sun onto a parabolic mirror of
more than 1,800 square metres, from which they are concentrated on a
focal point with a diameter of only 40 centimetres in the tower in front
of it. A [similar solar furnace stands in
Uzbekistan](http://www.flickr.com/photos/22988688@N00/221904120), built
in 1976, but it is slightly less powerful due to lower solar insolation
in the region. The picture on the right shows it in action, melting
metal.


don't need such an enormous structure to achieve high temperatures.
Several smaller solar furnaces have been built, often using only one
heliostat. They reach similar or only slightly lower temperatures
(usually between 1,500 and 3,000 °C) than the giants pictured above,
though at significantly lower power outputs (between 15 and 60 kW). They
can perform most of the same processes as the large solar furnaces, but
processing smaller amounts of materials or chemicals.

Examples of smaller solar furnaces can be found at the Paul Scherrer
Institute in Switzerland (pictured above), the National Renewable
Energies Laboratory in the USA, the Plataforma Solar de Almería in
Spain, the German Aerospace Center in Germany, and the Weizmann
Institute of Science in Israel (a solar power tower). They have
concentration ratios between 4,000 and 10,000. In solar concentration,
the temperature is proportional to the degree of concentration, whereas
power will be proportional to size and efficiency (which is mostly
determined by temperature).

Solar energy improves product quality

Solar furnaces not only have the potential to replace fossil fuels for
the energy-intensive production of construction materials, chemicals,
and high-tech products like
[microchips]({filename}/posts/embodied-energy-of-digital-technology.md)
and [solar
cells]({filename}/posts/the-ugly-side-o.md), but
they also offer additional benefits because of their pure combustion and
selective heating capacities. A 1999 research paper describes the
[manufacturing of silicon solar cells using a solar
furnace](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0927024895000992),
concluding that "solar furnace processing of silicon solar cells has the
potential to improve cell efficiency, reduce cell fabrication costs, and
also be an environmentally friendly manufacturing method. We have also
demonstrated that a solar furnace can be used to achieve solid-phase
crystallization of amorphous silicon at very high speed."

As opposed to low and medium temperature processes in industry, where
only the energy source is replaced and the machinery and distribution
infrastructure can remain in place, most high temperature solar heat
applications require new machinery. Furnaces and kilns have to be
rebuilt. Some efforts have been made. The Paul Sherrer Institute in
Switzerland designed several [solar powered lime and cement
kilns](http://infolib.hua.edu.vn/Fulltext/ChuyenDe/ChuyenDe07/CDe112/53.pdf)
(pdf), and research concluded that they could become [cost-competitive
with a fossil fuel powered
kiln](http://www.pre.ethz.ch/publications/journals/full/j105.pdf) (pdf)
following some further technological improvements. Again, the quality of
the product turned out to be better using solar energy, eliminating
combustion by-products.

[](http://krisdedecker.typepad.com/.a/6a00e0099229e88833015433d1b4ac970c-pi)Low-tech,
open source solar concentrators


existing solar funaces prove that anything could be produced using
direct solar heat instead of fossil fuels, this is not yet possible in a
cost-effective way (it is cheaper to use fossil fuels). However, since
solar furnaces could produce all materials needed to build more solar
furnaces, they might become cost-effective even without technical
improvements if fossil fuels become more expensive.

Moreover, the capital costs of solar concentrators are decreasing
quickly following some recent innovations aimed at simplifying the
technology. These might not only lead to cheaper high temperature solar
heat concentrators in the future, but they also make the use of solar
heat for medium temperatures more affordable and competitive today.

The most spectacular example is the [Solar Fire
P32](http://www.solarfire.org/) (picture above and pictures below), a
solar concentrator developed in 2010 by the French NGO the Solar Fire
Project. It is an open source design (joining forces with the [Open
Source Ecology
project](http://www.notechmagazine.com/2011/05/how-to-build-your-own-industrial-civilization.html)),
but the machine can also be bought for 7,500 euro dollar - less than the
price of an [urban wind
turbine]({filename}/posts/small-windmills-test-results.md).


Solar Fire P32 is built using simple, abundant and non-toxic materials.
Contrary to most other modern green technologies, there is no need for
rare earth metals or advanced tools that are not found in an average
metal workshop. Essentially, this is a renewable source of heat energy
analogous to [home made
windmills](http://www.notechmagazine.com/windmills/) used to produce
mechanical energy.

[](http://krisdedecker.typepad.com/.a/6a00e0099229e8883301543355ff59970c-pi)The
machine can deliver up to 15 kW and can reach a focal temperature of 700
°C (1,292 °F), enough to melt (and thus recycle) aluminum, the material
that is used to make its reflectors. This means that you could use a
Solar Fire P32 to make another Solar Fire P32. Or almost. The receiver
and the supporting structure are made of steel, which requires a higher
melting temperature to recycle. However, the structure could as well be
made of wood,
[basketry]({filename}/posts/basketry-the-art-of-producing-sustainable-consumer-goods.md)
or aluminum, and the steel receiver could easily be scavenged material.
The use of glass improves the workings of the device, but is not
strictly necessary.

> The Solar Fire P32 costs 7,500 dollar and can be used to make another
> Solar Fire P32

The Solar Fire P32 is composed of 360 small mirrors with a total surface
of 32 square metres, focusing sunlight on a steam boiler above them. The
steam can be used directly to purify large quantities of water, boil
milk, produce edible oils, make charcoal, bake bricks, make paper, and
so on.

Increasing energy autonomy


steam can also drive a steam engine to directly power a water pump, oil
and grain mills, cotton spinning, or any other stationary application
requiring mechanical power. Connected to a steam generator, the machine
can also generate electricity (up to 3 kW). These two last applications
involve conversion losses, but they are interesting additions for those
who want to achieve energy independence, especially in regions where
there is lots of sun but no wind. The machine can produce heat,
electricity and direct mechanical energy.

The Solar Fire P32 is - in the first place - aimed at developing
countries and designed to be cost-effective compared to burning coal and
wood, reducing deforestation and pollution, increasing energy autonomy,
and providing an energy source at the scale of traditional practices and
small industries. It has been built in Mexico, Cuba, Burkina-Faso, Mali,
India and Kenya, but also in Texas, France and Canada. Obviously, the
design could also be useful in the developed world, where the supply of
fossil fuels might not remain as easily accessible as it is today.

Simplifying technology


from the additional equipment that is required to generate electricity,
conventional solar concentrator technologies demand heavy capital
investments for several reasons. Parabolic trough systems and parabolic
dish systems require curved mirrors that are expensive to produce.
Moreover, these mirrors cannot be manufactured locally and often have to
be transported over long distances, increasing costs further. In both
systems the curved mirrors are large and heavy, requiring rigid frames,
strong foundations, powerful hydraulics and sophisticated tracking
systems to follow the sun. In parabolic dish systems, the heat engine or
steam boiler is part of the moving structure, increasing weight and thus
making things even worse.

Solar power towers - which were invented in 1878 - solve some of these
issues: they use nearly flat mirrors and all mirrors share one
stationary receiver. But, they require the construction of a large tower
building. Last but not least, all of these systems have very high land
requirements because of overshadowing issues. Linear Fresnel
concentrators use (mostly) flat mirrors, have simpler tracking systems
and are more compact, but they can only reach temperatures of 250 °C
(using relatively low-tech materials) or 450 °C (using sophisticated
technology).


Solar Fire is a Fresnel parabolic reflector with point focus, just like
ARUN - but unlike that machine it is placed horizontally and the
receiver does not have to be turned together with the mirrors, resulting
in light weight and high wind resistance. The machine uses slightly
curved mirrors, achieved by mechanical bending which can be done on the
spot. Sun tracking of the mirrors is done by hand, eliminating the need
for electronics and electric motors altogether (multiple mirrors can be
turned at once using hand operated wheels). This might sound crude, but
for industrial applications the machine has to be supervised anyway.

And because it is open source, it can be further improved by anyone.
Eerik Wissenz, the designer of the machine, thinks this is the only way:
"Companies pursuing patents for solar collectors have fallen into a
complexity trap. Since solar energy is free it is far simpler to add 5
percent more surface area instead of creating complex machines too
expensive to be commercially viable. Solar fire concentration is so
simple it cannot be patented."

Low-tech solar furnaces

High temperature solar furnaces can be low-tech autonomous systems, too.
One example is the large magnifying glass used by [Sundrop
Jewelry](http://www.sundropjewelry.com/), which reaches high enough
temperatures to melt coloured bottle glass into handcrafted jewelry. Of
course the power output is low, making this installation useless if you
want to produce industrial quantities of glass. But it shows that solar
heat can be used on any scale.


Markus Kayser, in which glass is produced using only sunlight and desert
sand. I would like to quote the artist here: "Whilst not providing
definitive answers, this experiment aims to provide a point of departure
for fresh thinking".

Storage

How can you power factories using an energy source that is not always
available? Solar insolation varies throughout the day and the seasons,
and there is no sun at night. Moreover, solar concentrator technologies
only work with unscattered sunlight, which means that a passing cloud
stops energy production. This raises two questions. Some industrial
processes work fine with intermittent energy supply, but how do you
guarantee an uninterrupted supply of energy to a process that requires
it? And what do you do when there is no sun at all for a week?

> Storing heat is much cheaper and more efficient than storing
> electricity in a battery

There are three ways to deal with the intermittency of solar power. The
first solution is to design hybrid systems: make solar and already
existing energy sources work together. This is how most of today's solar
thermal power plants work. In this scenario, which offers a solution for
both short and long term storage, industrial processes are powered by
solar heat whenever it is available. When it is not, solar energy is
instantly replaced by fossil fuels or electricity. It is not an ideal
solution, but it could save large amounts of energy. And we don't need
new technology to make it work.


The second strategy is to store solar energy so that it can be used to
smooth out industrial processes (analogous to a flywheel for smoothing
out mechanical processes) and to guarantee energy supply on cloudy days
or at night. Storage of heat is much cheaper and more efficient than
storage of electricity. The most low-tech way is to store heat in
well-insulated water reservoirs - another technology that is more than
100 years old. The disadvantages are that you need quite a lot of space,
and that water storage only works up to a temperature of 100 °C (212
°F). There are more compact ways to store heat at higher temperatures,
for example by using
[ceramics](http://www.saint-gobain-solar-power.com/solar-thermal-storage-norpro-9)
or phase-changing materials (certain salts). These storage media are
already used in one solar thermal power plant, but they would be even
more efficient if used in a thermal only system. Innovative technology
could further improve heat storage.

Storing work instead of energy

The third way to deal with the intermittency of solar heat is to store. We let our factories work when the sun
shines, and only when the sun shines. Just like we wait for a sunny day
to do the laundry, we could wait for a sunny day to bake bricks, recycle
metal or produce smartphones. Industrial production would be
concentrated in summer months. Of course, there is a price to pay.
Industrial production would be lower. But considering the fact that our
energy and environmental problems are largely caused by overproduction
and overconsumption of goods, this is not as far-fetched as it might
seem.

Combining all three strategies could be a solution. In that scenario we
would run part of our factories only when the sun shines (and [when the
wind
blows]({filename}/posts/history-of-industrial-windmills.md)),
using heat storage, fossil fuels, biomass or electricity to smooth out
industrial processes if necessary. Critical goods could be produced
continuously combining solar heat and heat storage, fossil fuels, or
biomass. Of course, not all climates are blessed with enough sun to make
solar heat a viable option to power the whole industry. But since many
people are now talking about outsourcing electricity production to
desert regions, we could just as well move our factories to regions
where there is plenty of sun. It is much more efficient to transport
manufactured goods over large distances than to transport electricity.

[](http://krisdedecker.typepad.com/.a/6a00e0099229e8883301538ffefdcb970b-pi)

Solar powered enhanced oil recovery

As always, a sustainable technology can be used for unsustainable
purposes. Solar heat is a great way to get more oil out of fields that
are now considered exhausted. Getting that remaining oil out using gas
would cost more money and energy than the oil could return, but using a
free source of energy changes everything.



At least one company specializes in this application.
[Glasspoint](http://www.glasspoint.com/), a US firm originally founded
to use solar heat for [drying gypsum wall
board](http://www.google.com/url?sa=t&source=web&cd=1&ved=0CBQQFjAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theoildrum.com%2Fnode%2F6264&rct=j&q=drying%20gypsum%20wall%20board%20oil%20drum&ei=FKAoTu7OMMSLswap0vC9CQ&usg=AFQjCNEcCfnSdKDbMrT3wYVPvb5KPLdNfQ&cad=rja),
has seen remarkable growth promoting "Solar Enhanced Oil Recovery".

This has been tried before, but they use an innovative technology:
parabolic trough mirrors suspended from the ceiling of enormous
glasshouse structures that are equipped with robotic cleaning systems.
Because they are protected from wind, sand and dust by the greenhouse,
the mirrors can be made extremely light and without protective glass
layers - lowering their costs and increasing their efficiency. The steam
that is generated by the solar heat is pumped into the oil reservoir.
The more sun there is, the more oil will come to the surface. Only 20 to
40 percent of an oil field can be recovered using standard techniques,
but as much as 60 to 80 percent can be recovered using solar heat. In
the end, solar heat could thus increase fossil fuel production and
CO2-emissions.

Kris De Decker (edited by Rachel Meyer)

![](https://www.paypalobjects.com/en_US/i/scr/pixel.gif){width="1"
height="1"}

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
   
   
   
   
 ------------------------------------------------------------------------

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Sources, inspiration & more information:

-   [The thermal problem and the solar (thermal)
    solution](http://www.solarfire.org/The-Thermal-Problem), Eerik
    Wissenz, 2011.
-   [Concentrating Solar
    Concentrators](http://www.builditsolar.com/Projects/Concentrating/concentrating.htm)
    at the Build it Solar Site. Lots of links to DIY-projects. Thanks to
    Paul Nash.
-   [High temperature solar
    collectors](http://www.eolss.net/ebooks/Sample%20Chapters/C08/E6-106-06-00.pdf),
    Robert Pitz-Paal, in 'Solar Energy Conversion and Photoenergy
    Systems'.
-   [Direct Use of the Sun's
    Energy](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/4871877124/ref=as_li_qf_sp_asin_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=217145&creative=399373&creativeASIN=4871877124)![](http://www.assoc-amazon.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=as2&o=1&a=4871877124&camp=217145&creative=399373){width="1"
    height="1"}, Farrington Daniels, 1964.
-   [Task 33 - Solar heat for industrial
    processes](http://www.iea-shc.org/task33/), Solar Heating and
    Cooling Programme, International Energy Agency.
-   [Potential for Solar Heat in Industrial
    Processes](http://www.iea-shc.org/publications/downloads/task33-Potential_for_Solar_Heat_in_Industrial_Processes.pdf)
    (pdf), Claudia Vannoni, Riccardo Battisti and Serena Drigo, Task 33
-   [Process Heat Collectors - state of the art within task
    33/IV](http://www.iea-shc.org/publications/downloads/task33-Process_Heat_Collectors.pdf)
    (pdf), Werner Weiss and Matthias Rommel
-   [Solar thermochemical process
    technology](http://www.pre.ethz.ch/publications/0_pdf/books/Solar_Thermochemical_Process_Technology.pdf),
    Aldo Steinfeld & Robert Palumbo, 2001
-   [Solar Heat Worldwide
    2011](http://www.iea-shc.org/publications/downloads/Solar_Heat_Worldwide-2011.pdf)
    (pdf), SHC, Werner Weiss & franz Mauthner, may 2011
-   [The Value of Concentrating Solar Power and Thermal Energy
    Storage](http://www.solarthermalworld.org/node/2966), National
    Renewable Laboratory, 2010
-   [Understanding solar
    collectors](http://www.cd3wd.com/cd3wd_40/vita/solrconc/en/solrconc.htm),
    George Kaplan, 1985
-   [Global Solar Thermal Energy
    Council](http://www.solarthermalworld.org/).
-   [So-Pro](http://www.solar-process-heat.eu): European project on
    solar process heat
-   [European Solar Thermal Industry
    Association](http://www.estif.org/home/)
-   [The European Alliance SolLab](http://www.sollab.eu)
-   [SolarPACES](http://www.solarpaces.org/inicio.php)
-   [CSP- how it
    works](http://www.solarpaces.org/CSP_Technology/csp_technology.htm)



Related articles:

-   [Fruit walls: urban solar farming in the
    1600s]({filename}/posts/fruit-walls-urban-farming.md)
-   [Reinventing the
    greenhouse]({filename}/posts/reinventing-the-greenhouse.md)
-   [The solar
    envelope]({filename}/posts/solar-oriented-cities-1-the-solar-envelope.md):
    how to heat and cool cities without fossil fuels
-   [How sustainable is PV solar
    power?]({filename}/posts/how-sustainable-is-pv-solar-power.md)
-   [Medieval
    smokestacks]({filename}/posts/peat-and-coal-fossil-fuels-in-pre-industrial-times.md):
    thermal energy in pre-industrial times
-   [Wind powered
    factories]({filename}/posts/history-of-industrial-windmills.md):
    the history (and future) of industrial windmills.
-   [Pedal powered farms and
    factories:]({filename}/posts/pedal-powered-farms-and-factories.md)
    the forgotten future of the stationary bicycle machine

[Main page](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/).

