Title: The velomobile: high-tech bike or low-tech car?
Date: 2010-09-30 15:11
Author: Kris De Decker
Category: Low-tech Solutions
Tags: recumbents, velomobile, velomobiles
Slug: the-velomobile-high-tech-bike-or-low-tech-car
Status: published



Recumbent bikes with bodywork evoke a curious effect. They look as fast
as a racing car or a jet fighter, but of course, they're not.
Nevertheless, thanks to the recumbent position, the minimal weight and
the outstanding aerodynamics, pedalling a "velomobile" requires three to
four times less energy than pedalling a normal bicycle.

This higher energy efficiency can be converted felt in terms of comfort,
but can also be utilised to attain higher speeds and longer distances -
regular cyclists can easily maintain a cruising speed of 40 km/h (25
mph) or more. The velomobile thus becomes an excellent alternative to
the automobile for medium distances, especially in bad weather.

Picture: the
[Versatile](http://www.flevobike.nl/content/view/26/56/lang,en/).

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Basically, a velomobile is a recumbent bike with the addition of a
bodywork. Recumbent bikes are considered a bit weird, but they have some
interesting advantages over normal bicycles. For example, a recumbent
bike has no saddle but a comfortable seat with back support, so that you
sit or lie more comfortably and can keep pedalling for longer. Because
of their superior aerodynamic capabilities, pedalling on a recumbent
takes less effort, allowing you to travel more quickly and further than
on a normal bicycle. Recumbent bikes can have two, three or four wheels.
Trikes (3 wheels) and quads (4 wheels) offer the additional benefit of
stability.



Picture: the
[Scorpion](http://www.hpvelotechnik.com/produkte/scorpion/index_e.html).

A velomobile - almost always a trike - offers two extra advantages over
normal recumbent tricycles. The bodywork protects the rider (and
mechanical parts) from the weather, so that the vehicle can be used in
any season or climate. Furthermore, the aerodynamic shape of the
bodywork further improves the efficiency of the vehicle, with
spectacular results.

Velomobile versus bicycle

From the table below
([source](http://users.telenet.be/fietser/fotos/VM4SD-FVDWsm.pdf).pdf)
one can observe that the power output required to achieve a speed of 30
kilometres per hour (18.6 mph) in a state-of-the-art velomobile (the
[Quest](http://en.velomobiel.nl/quest/)) is only 79 watts, compared to
271 watts on a normal bicycle and 444 watts on a neglected bicycle.
Pedalling at a speed of 30 km/h thus requires 3.5 times less energy with
a velomobile than with a normal bicycle. Going flat out (a power output
of 250 watts) gives you a speed of 29 km/h (18 mph) on a normal bicycle
and 50 km/h (31 mph) on a velomobile.



Source: "[The velomobile as a vehicle for more sustainable
transportation](http://users.telenet.be/fietser/fotos/VM4SD-FVDWsm.pdf)"
(pdf).

NASA rates the average long-term power output for a male adult at 75
watts, while fit individuals might easily sustain more than 100 watts
for several hours, from 200 to 300 watts for one hour, and between 300
and 400 watts for at least 10 minutes. Lance Armstrong is said to have
averaged between 475 and 500 watts for 38 minutes during an uphill climb
in the 2001 Tour de France. (Source: [The human powered
home](http://www.amazon.com/Human-Powered-Home-Choosing-Muscles-Motors/dp/0865716013)).

If you normally commute by bicycle, you can do two things with a
velomobile: Retain the same speed as you normally do, but use 3.5 times
less energy, or arrive at your destination twice as quickly with the
same effort. This high efficiency greatly enlarges the range of a pedal
powered vehicle. The bicycle is generally being viewed as a transport
means for short distances, mostly below 5 kilometres or 3 miles (=
cycling 15 minutes at a speed of 20km/h or 12.4 mph). However, the
average distance of a car trip in Europe and in the US amounts to
between 13 and 15 kilometres (8 and 9.3 miles).



Picture: the [Sinner Mango Red
Edition](http://www.go-mango.nl/indexuk.html).

A velomobile reaches a constant cruising speed of 35 km/h (21.7 mph)
with the same energy output, so that the distance covered in 15 minutes
becomes 9 kilometres (5.5 miles) instead of 5 kilometres (3 miles). At a
speed of 45 km/h (not unusual for a regular cyclist) the distance
covered in 15 minutes becomes more than 11 kilometres (6.8 miles). Thus,
twenty minutes of pedalling on a velomobile sufficiently covers an
average automobile trip. The velomobile could replace a substantial
portion of car miles, especially because the vehicles also protect their
occupants from wind, rain and cold.



By definition, velomobiles are built for speed. The bodywork offers a
distinct advantage at higher speeds, starting at 20 to 25 km/h (12.4 to
15.5 mph). Above those speeds, almost all energy produced by a cyclist
is channelled toward combating air resistance. Because of the upright
position, the aerodynamics of a cyclist on a normal bicycle are
disappointing. A velomobile, on the other hand, suffers less air
resistance than even the most aerodynamic sports car.

At lower speeds, however, the relatively heavy (25 to 40 kilograms)
velomobile becomes a disadvantage. It accelerates slower than a normal
bicycle, and has considerably more difficulty climbing a hill. An
electric assist motor can solve this problem in hilly regions. The motor
can help the velomobile climb, while energy can be recovered from the
brakes during the descent. Of course, an electric assist can also be
considered on flat terrain, an option that is [gaining a lot of
popularity these
days]({filename}/posts/electric-velomobiles.md).



Picture: the de [Leiba
x-stream](http://www.leiba.de/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=44&Itemid=94).

By definition, the velomobile is essentially built for longer distances.
For shorter city trips the traditional bicycle is unbeatable. It
accelerates faster, it is more manoeuvrable, and it is very easy to hop
on and off.

Velomobile versus electric car

Dries Callebaut and Brecht Vandeputte, the Belgian designers of the
[WAW-velomobile](http://www.notechmagazine.com/2010/05/belgian-recumbent-tricycles.html),
calculated how the efficiency of a velomobile relates to the efficiency
of an electric automobile (using their own data and [this
source](http://www.withouthotair.com/Contents.html)). During an
eco-marathon earlier this year they equipped their velomobile with an
electric motor, a complete substitution for pedal power. This is not
really what the vehicle is intended for, but the advantage of the
experiment is that it allows for an unequivocal comparison.

The energy consumption of the WAW was measured at 0.7 kWh per 100 kms
(62 miles). This makes the velomobile in excess of 20 times more
efficient than electric cars currently on the market. For example, the
Nissan Leaf requires 15 kWh per 100 kms. The enormous difference is of
course due to the enormous difference in weight. Without the battery,
the Nissan weighs just over a ton, while the WAW weighs less than 30
kgs.



Picture: the
[Versatile](http://www.flevobike.nl/content/view/26/56/lang,en/).

For a human powered velomobile the comparison is a bit more complicated
and open to interpretation, because a human does not run (primarily) on
electricity, but on biomass. The efficiency of a human powered
velomobile thus depends on what the cyclist eats (the efficiency of an
electric car also depends on how the electricity is generated).
Callebaut and Vandeputte set the primary energy use to 0.6 kWh/100 km
for a vegetarian diet from your own garden, to 2.4 kWh per 100 km for
the average diet of the western non-vegetarian.



Picture: the
[Versatile](http://www.flevobike.nl/content/view/26/56/lang,en/).

A human powered velomobile is thus 15 to 62 times more energy efficient
than a Nissan Leaf. Not just 6 to 25 times, because we are comparing
primary energy here. The 15 kWh that is consumed by the Nissan equates
to around 37.5 kWh primary energy since electricity plants (in Europe)
have an efficiency of 40 percent.

You can also argue that burning fat is a positive thing regardless of
where food comes from, since obesity and a lack of exercise are endemic
throughout the western world. The energy that is now being wasted in
fitness centra, or the fat that is hanging in front of the television,
could be put to good use as an oil substitute in transportation. In this
view, the velomobile consumes (just as the cyclist and the pedestrian)
0,00 kWh per 100 kilometres.

Origins

The origins of the velomobile can be traced back to the beginnings of
the twentieth century, but the modern, streamlined velomobile only
appeared in the 1980s. The first commercially available velomobile was
the Danish [Leitra](http://www.leitra.dk/). In 1993, the Dutch
[Alleweder](http://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alleweder) appeared on the
market. About 500 of them were were sold in the Netherlands, Belgium and
Germany throughout the 1990s.



Picture: the [Alleweder](http://www.alligt.nl/).

The Alleweder introduced an important technological innovation: the
self-supporting, monocoque coach work, similar in construction to that
of a car - though much lighter. This gave the velomobile a sturdier
construction without weighing it down. The suspension system introduced
by the Alleweder was also inspired by automobiles. The bodywork of the
original Alleweder is made from aluminum plates riveted together, a
technique inspired by airplane builders.

With or without a roof

All velomobiles produced since then are based on the construction
principles of the Alleweder. The only difference is that the bodywork no
longer consists of aluminum but is made up of composites (like Kevlar).
These materials are more expensive, but offer more freedom in designing
the fairing, allowing for better aerodynamics.



Picture: the [Go One 3](http://www.go-one.us/).

A modern velomobile weighs between 24 and 40 kilograms, is about 250
centimetres long, 80 centimeters wide and 95 centimetres high. The three
wheels have suspension and the bodywork has integrated rear view
mirrors, head lights, indicators and (sometimes) brake lights. A
velomobile also has a luggage compartment comparable to that of a sports
car.

The present-day velomobile comes in two varieties: vehicles in which the
head of the driver sticks out (like the
[Quest](http://en.velomobiel.nl/quest/), the
[WAW](http://sites.google.com/site/agendafietser/Home/waw), the
[Versatile](http://www.flevobike.nl/content/view/26/56/lang,en/), the
[Mango](http://www.go-mango.nl/indexuk.html), the
[Velayo](http://www.fortschritt-fahrzeugbau.de/design.htm#special), and
the [Alleweder](http://www.alligt.nl/)) and vehicles in which the driver
is fully enclosed (like the [Go-One](http://www.go-one.us/), the
[Leiba](http://www.leiba.de/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=21&Itemid=42),
the [Leitra](http://www.leitra.dk/), the
[Pannonrider](http://pannonrider.pannonsolar.hu/pannonrider/pannonrider_2_english.html)
and the [Cab-Bike](http://www.bluevelo.com/bluevelo_-_Cab-Bike.html)).
In the case of a fully enclosed vehicle, part of the bodywork can be
opened to get in and out. In a half-open velomobile, the driver enters
and leaves via the hole where the head sticks through.

Velomobiles can have open or closed wheel arches. Closed wheel arches
give better aerodynamics but they make the turning cycle larger and
hamper the changing of a tyre.



Picture: the
[Pannonrider](http://pannonrider.pannonsolar.hu/pannonrider/pannonrider_2_english.html)
([picture
credit](http://www.flickr.com/photos/43910888@N03/sets/72157624977267412/with/4999048449/))
has solar panels on the bodywork (wind power is [another
option!](http://www.notechmagazine.com/2010/07/wind-powered-trikes.html)).

Fully enclosed velomobiles give the best protection against bad weather,
of course, but they do carry a few disadvantages. The main problem has
to do with ventilation. Even in cold weather, the driver may "overheat".
A body that delivers 200 watts, produces around 1000 watts of waste
heat, which mostly escapes via the head. In a fully enclosed velomobile
hearing and sight are also affected. The windshield can steam up or it
can become opaque because of rain or snow (windscreen wipers are not an
option on any velomobile, probably because of the extra weight that
would be added by motor and battery).



Picture: the
[Velayo](http://www.fortschritt-fahrzeugbau.de/design.htm#special).

A fully enclosed velomobile thus needs an efficient natural ventilation
system (which can happen via air intake in the nose of the vehicle).
Some manufacturers have come up with a compromise. The WAW has a [small
optional
roof](http://sites.google.com/site/agendafietser/Home/waw/eigenschappen-waw/comfortabel)
with a ventilation system that can be manipulated from the inside of the
vehicle. It can be quickly installed and it fits in the trunk when
folded up. The Versatile also has a [smart
roof](http://www.flevobike.nl/content/view/30/65/lang,en/), bypassing
the heat and ventilation problem while still protecting the rider from
the rain.



The German manufacturer Hase recently presented a recumbent tricycle
with a [foldable fairing](http://www.bentrideronline.com/?p=4003) (and
an electric assist motor). This is not a compromise between a fully or a
semi-enclosed velomobile but between the latter and a normal recumbent
trike - the most comfortable and aerodynamic option in warm weather.

Two-seaters

Recently, some two-seater velomobiles have appeared, such as the
[Bakmobiel](http://picasaweb.google.be/Waw.ulv/Bakmobiel#) (a cargo
bike) and the [DuoQuest](http://www.velomobiel.nl/duoquest/). The
essential idea is that occupants sit next to each other. It's good to
see that cosiness still beats aerodynamics.



Another recent trend are velomobiles that have been especially designed
to [easily hop in and out
of](http://www.leiba.de/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=24&Itemid=82).
The adapted design lowers weather protection and aerodynamics, but the
result is still a more efficient bicycle at higher speeds, which comes
in handy for shorter distances.

Are velomobiles too expensive?

The high purchase price is often mentioned as one of the largest
obstacles for a breakthrough of the velomobile in the mainstream market.
A fully equipped machine will cost you at least 5,000 euro (6,700
dollar) - considerably more than what you pay for a good quality
bicycle. In the US prices have come down from a level twice as high,
since now some of the popular Northern European brands are [also
produced in the States](http://www.bluevelo.com). Shipping a velomobile
across the Atlantic is not cheap.



The high price stems partly from the surcharge of a recumbent, but
mainly from bodywork. Each velomobile is hand-crafted, with the fairing
requiring the most work. It would of course be cheaper to produce
velomobiles on an assembly line, especially when this would happen in a
low-wage country. But even then - including social exploitation and
extra environmental costs - nobody expects to see a velomobile sold for
less than half the current price. Lightweight materials, crucial to make
the technology work, just happen to be expensive.



You can look at it differently, of course. A velomobile is more
expensive than a bicycle, but it is cheaper than an automobile. Since
the performance and the comfort are also in between that of a car and a
bicycle, the price starts to look more reasonable. Moreover, a car
requires fuel, and a velomobile doesn't. Maintenance is limited to
changing the tyres. Whoever changes his or her automobile for a
velomobile is definitely making a economical decision. Governments could
help overcome the purchase price by financially supporting velomobiles
instead of electric cars and biofuels - at least their [ecological gain
is clear](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/biofuels/) and they don't need
a completely [new charging
infrastructure]({filename}/posts/fast-charging-electric-cars-off-peak-grid.md).

Alternative to the automobile?

The most important obstacle for the velomobile is not the purchase
price. It is the competition of the automobile. Although a velomobile
can ride on a wide enough bicycle path, because of its larger dimension
and higher speeds the vehicle is more suited for the road. The concept
of the velomobile is sound as long as the vehicle does not have to share
the road with automobiles. On current roads, piloting a velomobile would
be relatively dangerous. Car drivers don't always see you, and in spite
of the many strengthenings in the bodywork you are very vulnerable
against, say, a Jeep Cherokee.



Picture: the [Alleweder](http://www.alligt.nl/).

A breakthrough in the velomobile thus requires either a completely new
infrastructure for pedal power, or the substitution of velomobiles (and
other human powered vehicles) for automobiles on the existing local and
regional road system. The latter option, [which I
prefer]({filename}/posts/get-rid-of-cars-ride-a-bicycle.md),
would not be conducive to car sales, but there is nothing or nobody that
stops car manufacturers from producing velomobiles.

© Kris De Decker (edited by Shameez Joubert)


Related articles:



-   [Cargo cyclists replace truck drivers on European city
    streets]({filename}/posts/jobs-of-the-future-cargo-cyclist.md)
-   [Electric
    velomobiles]({filename}/posts/electric-velomobiles.md):
    as fast and comfortable as an automobile, but 80 times more
    efficient
-   [How to downsize a transport
    network]({filename}/posts/the-chinese-wheelbarrow.md):
    the Chinese wheelbarrow
-   [Pedal powered farms and
    factories]({filename}/posts/pedal-powered-farms-and-factories.md):
    the forgotten future of the stationary bicycle
-   [Cars, out of the
    way]({filename}/posts/get-rid-of-cars-ride-a-bicycle.md)
-   [The status quo of electric
    cars]({filename}/posts/the-status-quo-of-electric-cars-better-batteries-same-range.md):
    better batteries, same range
-   [The industrialization of
    traffic](http://www.notechmagazine.com/2010/04/the-industrialization-of-traffic-why-bicycles-are-faster-than-cars.html):
    why bicycles are faster than cars
-   [Wood gas
    vehicles]({filename}/posts/wood-gas-cars.md):
    firewood in the fuel tank
-   Short [pedal power
    posts](http://www.notechmagazine.com/pedal-power/) at No Tech
    Magazine

Some blogs on recumbents and velomobiles:

-   [The recumbent blog](http://www.recumbentblog.com)
-   [Bentrider Online](http://www.bentrideronline.com)
-   [Ligfiets.net](http://www.ligfiets.net) (in Dutch)



----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
