Title: The digital oubliette
Date: 2008-01-25 23:26
Author: Kris De Decker
Category: Low-tech Solutions
Slug: the-digital-d-1
Status: published


Chances are slim your children will be able to enjoy the family photo
album when they grow up.[]{lang="EN-GB"}

Nowadays family pictures, writings and home movies are stored on digital
media, under the impression that this personal information will be
accessible for a lifetime. However, this is not self-evident.

To guarantee the accessibility in the not even so far future, digital
data requires active and regular maintenance – contrary to the archiving
of analogue media.

Even though this constitutes a large challenge for libraries, for them
the problem is not insurmountable. But in everyday life, a lot of
personal information is in peril of getting lost.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div>

> > "With increased convenience, so it seems, comes a decreased life
> > expectancy"

</div>

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
   
 ------------------------------------------------------------------------

The benefits of a digital archive are unmistakably large. Electronic
files take up much less space than the same amount of information on
paper or on other analogue media. At least as important is the much
higher availability of the data. Digital information can be copied en
masse in a matter of seconds and a document residing in a digital
archive can be consulted by multiple people at the same time.

Moreover, if this electronic archive can be consulted via the internet,
the information is available day and night, from anywhere in the world.
Sharing pictures was never as easy as it is today.

At the same time, it’s impossible to damage or steal the original
documents (if there are original documents). An electronic archive also
has very powerful search and navigation capabilities. Unfortunately, the
digital medium has important drawbacks too, which undermine all the
advantages.

[](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2008/01/the-digital-d-1.html#more)
Physical obsolescence

The first problem is the physical durability of digital data carriers or
storage media, which is notably shorter than that of analogue media.  

Stone, the most ancient information carrier, still has the best life
expectancy. It lasts several thousands of years – but it is not in the
most convenient archiving format.

If treated well, paper can be kept for at least one hundred years, while
good quality paper can be maintained up to 500 years. CD’s and DVD’s
have a life expectancy of only 50 to 100 years. With increased
convenience, so it seems, comes a decreased life expectancy.

Worse, however, is the life expectancy of (re)writable optical media,
like DVD-R and DVD-RW. These are the storage media that people use to
save their family pictures, writings and movies.

Manufacturers of (re)writable optical discs claim a life expectancy
comparable to that of pre-recorded compact discs, but experts say these
claims are way too optimistic. Archivists count on a maximum life
expectancy of around ten years, comparable to the life expectancy of
magnetic tapes like music and video cassettes.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div>

> "Chances are in twenty years we laugh out as loud with CD’s and DVD’s
> as we do now with floppy discs."

</div>

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


Rewritable media might resemble pre-recorded digital media, but they are
a very different technology. They are decaying much faster and they are
extremely vulnerable to environmental conditions like humidity,
temperature and even light. If not saved with care, these media can
become unusable in just a few years, or even months.

Hard disks and portable media like mp3-players and USB-sticks also have
a disappointing life expectancies of less than ten years. Therefore, if
you want to keep digital information for a lifetime, you have to copy
the data to new discs every couple of years. Archivists and professional
photographers are doing that already. They also make two copies: one to
use and one to store in optimal conditions.

Technological obsolescence

Unfortunately, the limited physical life expectancy of digital media is
not the only challenge for long-term storage of digital information.
Even worse is the danger of technological obsolescence. An analogue
letter or picture is easy to keep, since data carrier and information
are inseparably tied to each other.

To store the information, all you have to do is store the data carrier.
To consult a 100 year-old book or photo album, you only have to open it.
Not so in the case of a digital file. Here, the data carrier alone does
not suffice to consult the information. You do not only have to save the
“letter”, but also the machine which is needed to “read” it. (And, of
course, you need electricity to run the machine.)


some extent, the same is true for a music cassette or an LP – you need a
music cassette player or a turntable to listen to the recording. In the
case of digital information, however, you need more than just a
computer. The accessibility of a digital file depends on a certain
configuration, a specific combination of hardware and software.

To read an e-mail or to view a digital photo-album, you need a
particular e-mail or imaging program, which in its turn is dependent of
a particular operating system. This operating system only runs on a
certain computer platform. If the e-mail or photo-album is stored on an
external storage medium, like a DVD-ROM, you also need a specific
reading device. If just one of these components is not present, then the
data are not accessible.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div>

> "To consult a 100 year-old book or photo album, you only have to open
> it. Not so in the case of a digital file"

</div>

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
   
 ------------------------------------------------------------------------

The rapid developments in hardware and software threaten to make the
life expectancy of the now massively produced digital information
extremely short. For example: diskettes, the accepted storage technology
during the first half of the nineties, are impossible to read on most
laptops today. Digital storage media of 20 years ago (large floppy
discs) are unreadable by any computer on the market today.

Chances are in twenty years we laugh out as loud with CD’s and DVD’s as
we do now with floppy discs. The storage medium does not even have to
change format to become unreadable. Not all DVD-players are capable of
reading CD-R’s or CD-RW’s, because their laser beam uses a different
wave length. And if it’s not the data carrier that changes, then it’s a
standard, a software program or a cable, like the transition from the
serial port to the USB.

  

The computer museum strategy


libraries, where digital preservation has been a hot topic for some
years now, two different strategies are applied to save digital
information. The first approach is sometimes called the “computer museum
strategy”.

The library stores all the machines which are needed to read the files:
not only the successive generations of computers but also the compatible
software, storage devices, cables, keyboards, mice, etcetera. This
procedure is easy, but far from optimal.

Firstly, after some time you need a lot of space to stockpile all the
machines, while the digitalisation process was meant to save space.
Secondly, and more importantly, if a machine breaks down, it might be
impossible to find spare parts.  
  

The migration strategy

The second strategy is the “migration” of the digital documents to the
successive hardware and software platforms. In this case, files are not
only regularly transferred to new data carriers (to prevent physical
obsolescence) but also to the successive generations of hardware and
software. That means every file should be copied to a new format,
preferably not to a successive version of the same commercial format
(like Word or Outlook Express) but to an open standard like XML, HTML or
PDF.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div>

> "One strategy is to save not only the successive generations of
> computers but also the compatible software, storage devices, cables,
> keyboards, mice, etcetera."

</div>

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

With this method, it is not necessary to save the hardware and software
on which the documents were made, or on which the emails were received.
It is a much more elegant solution that preserves all benefits of the
digital medium. The life expectancy of PDF and XML is 50 years or more,
and since it concerns an open format, new programs can always be written
to open the documents.


The most important drawback of this strategy is that saving digital
files is becoming a very time-consuming activity, which can never be
completely automated: the user has to decide which documents to save,
which name to give them, and where to save them.

The user also has to check whether or not the transformation of the
document was successful, because during the migration of the content
mistakes can occur (in the worst case scenario a text can become a set
of meaningless characters). For a library or a professional archivist
department, this is a hell of a job, but it’s not an insurmountable
obstacle. For the masses, however, migration is mostly not a realistic
option since it would become something of a part-time job.

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
   
 ------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

The printing strategy

For computer-illiterate consumers, therefore, only two options remain.
Either they choose, consciously or not, the ‘computer museum strategy’ -
for example, my own digital files are distributed among 4 obsolete
computers. Or they *print out* the texts and pictures they really want
to keep – like I do, or try to do, with the most important emails and
pictures.

The result, I must confess, is confusing. After 12 years of writing, I
have built up a small room full of “digital” archives, in the form of
paper and machines – with all the advantages of digital archiving gone
and with many important files still in danger of extinction.

There were days that I dreamt of digitalizing my paper archive. Now I
realize that it would mean first scanning all the documents to be able
to search them digitally, and then later printing them to store them for
the future, which would not leave me time to do anything else.

© Kris De Decker (edited by Vincent Grosjean)

Pictures computers : [old computers](http://oldcomputers.net/) / Picture
hieroglyph : [dustinpsmith](http://flickr.com/photos/dustinpsmith/) /
Picture intro: low-tech magazine

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
More :


  

[Truckloads of hard
disks]({filename}/posts/sneakernet-beats-internet.md)
: the revival of the sneakernet

[Second hand bits and
bytes]({filename}/posts/second-hand-bit.md) :
why reselling digital products is not allowed

[Faster internet is
impossible]({filename}/posts/faster-internet.md)
: internet users continually need faster connections to surf the web at
the same speed

[Information damages the
environment]({filename}/posts/information-dam.md)
: is an electronic newspaper more ecological than a paper newspaper?

[Satellite navigation in the 18th
century]({filename}/posts/satellite-nav-1.md) :
the surprising accuracy of celestial navigation

[Main page](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/) / Subscribe via
[email](http://www.feedburner.com/fb/a/emailverifySubmit?feedId=1685209&loc=en_US)
or
[feed](http://feeds2.feedburner.com/typepad/krisdedecker/lowtechmagazineenglish)
/ Follow us on [Twitter](http://twitter.com/lowtechmagazine) or
[Facebook](http://www.facebook.com/group.php?gid=202749795069).

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

  

