Title: Sunbathing in the living room: oven stoves and heat walls
Date: 2008-12-05 16:57
Author: Kris De Decker
Category: Low-tech Solutions
Tags: kachelofen, low-tech, masonry heaters, oven stoves, soapstone heaters, tile stoves
Slug: tile-stoves
Status: published



Oven stoves are greener, more efficient, healthier, safer and cosier
than all modern heating systems. Why are they gone and how do we get
them back?

An oven stove is a very efficient and robust oven that radiates heat all
day. In the US it was introduced only 20 years ago, but in Europe the
technology is almost one thousand years old. Especially in Russia,
Scandinavia and Central Europe the oven stove has a long and rich
tradition.

In the 18th century, several European governments financed research to
improve the technology, as a way to overcome an acute shortage of
firewood: ecotech before the term existed. However, its further
development and distribution was thwarted by the arrival of coal, gas
and oil. Oven stoves are large, heavy and slow, but they offer so many
advantages that they – again - deserve to be subsidized by the
government.

  

Most people think that the metal stove was the successor of the campfire
and the fireplace, and if you only look at the US, that is true. In the
New World, there was never a shortage of firewood and therefore no
incentive to improve the inefficient fireplace. But in Europe and
Northern-Asia, there was an important and succesful link between the
fireplace and the metal stove.


It is known as the Russian, Austrian, Finnish, Swedish or German stove,
or as “kakelugn” (in Sweden), “pechka” (in Russia), “kachelöfen” or
“steinöfen” (in Germany and Austria), and as “tulikivi” (in Finland).

More general terms are tile oven, brick oven, ceramic stove, tiled
stove, soapstone heater or masonry heater. The technology is more
closely related to a traditional oven than to a metal stove – therefore
the German term “kachelöfen” (oven stove) describes it best as an
umbrella term.

Oven stoves already appear on drawings and paintings in the 1300s (see
illustrations above and below). They are in fact the first real heating
appliances in history. Earlier, the Romans invented the
[hypocaust](http://images.google.es/images?hl=es&client=firefox-a&rls=org.mozilla:es-ES:official&hs=N6u&q=hypocaust&lr=&um=1&ie=UTF-8&sa=N&tab=wi),
a forerunner of central heating, but that knowledge was largely lost
when their civilization collapsed.


Oven stoves are traditionally fuelled on wood, but today they can also
be equipped to work on gas, or alternately on both fuels. They can even
cooperate with a central heating system. An oven stove can take any form
or dimensions: it can be almost invisible, built into a wall or
underneath the stairs, or it can be an impressive work of art standing
in the middle of the living room.

Stone versus metal

The most essential feature of an oven stove is that it is made out of
some kind of stone or brick, while all our modern heating appliances are
made of steel. Metal heats up fast, but it also cools down just as
quickly. Therefore, a metal heating appliance has to be fuelled almost
continuously.


Stone requires more time to heat up, but once it has, it holds the heat
much longer. An oven stove is only fired for a short time, from a
quarter of an hour to one or two hours and only once or twice per day.
An average oven stove then radiates heat for at least 12 hours.

Smoke channels


main part of the heating appliance consists of a labyrinth of smoke
channels and smoke rooms. Their aim is to hold the warm gasses inside
the oven as long as possible, so that the stone can absorb the heat
before it leaves the chimney.

The energetic output of an oven stove is 80 to 90 percent, compared to
40 to 50 percent for metal stoves or central heating appliances, and
only 10 to 15 percent for a fireplace – where most heat escapes via the
chimney. One of the most striking features of a (wood fuelled) oven
stove is the stokehold, which looks ridiculously small compared to the
stove itself.


Thanks to the high output, a modest masonry heater or tile stove
(heating a room of 60 square meters) only needs 6 cubic meters of wood
per year: one tree. If you have even a small garden, you can easily fuel
your oven stove by means of your own cuttings – thin wood is very well
suited for tile stoves, although it needs to be dry enough.

Radiant heat

All our contemporary heating appliances warm a house or a room mainly by
means of convection: they heat up the air. An oven stove does it by
means of radiant heat: infrared radiation, comparable to the heat of the
sun. In a room that is heated by an oven stove, a thermometer can hardly
measure anything.

The effect is comparable to that of a skier who enjoys a *schnapps*
while sunbathing, in spite of the freezing temperatures. Radiant heat
does not (only) warm up the air, but particularly also the body of the
skier directly.


An oven stove acts in the same way as the sun: it does not so much heat
the air, but the floor, the walls, the furniture and the people in the
room. These objects in their turn radiate that absorbed heat to their
environment – similar to a city radiating heat after a long hot summer
day, when the walls and the pavement slowly release back the heat from
the sun.

This might sound a bit weird for 21st century computer wizards, but
until 150 years ago heating was by definition radiant heating. Heating
by convection is a very recent invention, and it has more drawbacks than
advantages.

Hot air balloon

Convection causes constant air movement in the house, because hot air is
pushed upwards (the principle of a hot air balloon) and cold air is
being sucked in (all convectors need a constant supply of air). Warm air
rises to the ceiling, while the people that it should warm find
themselves on the floor. This is not very efficient. Moreover, it is
always too hot close to the radiator or the stove and always too cold at
the other side of the room.

Secondly, convection is not healthy. The dust in the house starts
floating around, which irritates the respiratory system. In combination
with the drying effect of warm air and by the scorching of dust by the
metal surfaces of radiators and stoves, this leads to an unpleasant,
alkaline air climate, which can cause headaches.


This problem is mostly solved by air humidifiers or electric water
heaters, which blow a mix of steam and air into the room. Unfortunately,
this creates the ideal conditions for house dust mite and for nasty
fungii. You can not open a window to ventilate, because then the warm
air escapes quickly.

Sleeping on the stove


An oven stove has none of these disadvantages. Because it hardly warms
up air, there is no dust circulation. Because the surface of the oven
does not become as hot as the surface of a metal stove or a radiator,
there is no scorching of dust.

And because the air does not rise, the heat is distributed evenly across
the room, instead of rising to the ceiling (or via an open staircase to
the upper floors). This means you can open a window upstairs to
ventilate the house, without losing energy.

Because the exterior of an oven stove does not become too hot, there is
no danger of burning yourself. This quality is sometimes used to
integrate a bench or a couch into the stove, a luxury that no other
heating appliance can offer. In Russia it used to be a habit to install
[beds atop of an oven
stove](http://www.moncton.net/forum/112778/ShowThread.aspx).

Thanks to their warm (but not too warm) exterior, oven stoves offer more
possibilities. They are very well suited to keep pots and pans warm, or
to dry laundry – metal stoves or radiators are mostly too hot for that.
A ceramic stove can be equipped with hot plates and an oven, so that it
can be used as a cooking appliance, too.


Complete combustion

Oven stoves are an alternative for all modern heating appliances, but
compared to wood stoves they have another, important advantage. More and
more people choose wood as an energy source for heating, so that they
are not dependent on the unpredictable energy prices of oil and gas.


In one sense this is not a bad thing, since unlike gas and oil, wood is
a renewable and CO2-neutral fuel (the CO2 that is produced by the
burning of wood was taken out of the atmosphere by the tree during the
years before). The problem is that wood stoves are not very efficient,
and extremely polluting.

Wood can be burned without too much air pollution, but then the
temperature has to be high enough: 1100 to 1200 degrees Celsius. In that
case, 99 percent of the wood is converted to CO2 and water vapour,
almost without smoke. A metal wood stove, however, only reaches a
temperature of 650 to 700 degrees, with an incomplete wood combustion as
a result.

Wood consists for two thirds out of combustible gases and for one third
out of combustible material. In the case of an incomplete combustion,
these gases escape as smoke via the chimney. In regions where many
people use wood heating, the air quality worsens dramatically (an
incomplete wood combustion is [more
polluting](http://www.epa.gov/woodstoves/refp.html) than the burning of
oil or gas).

Overheating


In a wood stove the fire is quelled by diminishing the supply of air, if
not the room would overheat by the fast release of warmth by the metal
appliance. Because an oven stove does not immediately release the heat
of the fire, but stores it temporarily in the masonry mass, wood can be
burned at a very high temperature without overheating the room.

An oven stove is always stoked at full power, even if a lower
temperature is desired: in that case you simply stoke a smaller portion
of wood, or you stoke less often.

A complete combustion is not only advantageous for air quality and
efficiency, it is also safer. In the case of an incomplete combustion,
the chimney gets ever more densely set with creosote, which can lead to
a chimney fire when one day the stove is fuelled at full power (the
reason why a chimney has to be cleaned regularly).

Instant heat


stoves have some disadvantages, too, although none of them are
insuperable. Probably the largest drawback is the fact that a tile stove
or masonry heater does not deliver the instant heat that we got used to.

If you turn on the gas stove, you are almost immediately rewarded with
heat. But an oven stove takes a couple of hours before it starts
radiating heat. That is not such a problem during long, cold periods,
because once the cycle has been started and the stove is stoked shortly
each morning, the house is always warm.

It is less obvious during periods with large temperature fluctuations,
or when you travel a lot. You can make the best of that, by dressing
warm for instance, or in a less low-tech way by installing an extra
heating appliance – like a gas stove – in the same room.

This second heating generator may also be a much smaller tile stove, or
a ceramic oven (a small tile stove meant solely for cooking). The small
one can then be used to heat up the room relatively fast while the large
one is warming up. A tile stove equipped with two stokeholds, a big one
for the heating and a smaller one for cooking, offers the same
possibility.

Overheating

A masonry heater neither delivers the fine temperature tuning of other
heating appliances. If a wood or gas stove is overheating the room, you
simply turn it lower and the temperature goes down fast. With a tile
stove, this is impossible to do.


If you burn too much wood or gas in the morning, this decision can not
be reversed during the course of the day. There is no option left but to
open the windows, and that is not so efficient anymore. Heating a room
to the right temperature thus requires some practice and dedication,
especially in a climate which is not like it is in Russia or Finland.


A third disadvantage of the tile stove is a consequence of radiant heat.
An oven stove only heats the room where it is positioned. Opening the
door will not warm up the room next to it, because it is largely lying
in the “shadow” of the radiant heat.

This is again comparable to a warm sun on a winter day: if you step out
of the sun into the shade, the radiant heat is gone and all you feel is
the air temperature. A gas or wood stove does not perform too well on
this either, but a central heating system seems to be the indisputable
winner. However, a tile stove does not exclude a system of central
heating.

Heat walls

Heat walls or heat floors are another way of applying radiant heat.
Here, warm water is not led through plate steel radiators as in a
conventional central heating system, but through plastic hoses which are
integrated into the walls (or into fake walls). Because of its porous
surface a stone wall can not heat up air, it radiates like a tile stove.


Heat walls can be combined with an oven stove. The stove is connected to
a boiler system, which distributes the warm water via hoses in the walls
or the floor throughout the house. In this way one tile stove (assuming
it is powerful enough) can heat up all rooms in a house, something which
is otherwise not possible. In the same way a tile stove can deliver warm
water for a household.


Heat walls can also be combined with an existing central heating
appliance. This is already a step in the right direction, because the
energy consumption goes down (the water does not have to be as warm as
in the case of a traditional central heating system, because the heat is
radiated over a larger surface area) and you get a better interior air
climate.


As a third possibility an oven stove can also be connected to a network
of metal radiators ([as in this
church](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/oven-stove-in-russian-church.html)),
but in that case you lose the advantage of radiant heat. Steel plate
radiators warm up the air.

Heavy, bulky and expensive

Another, quite fundamental drawback is that oven stoves are rather big
and heavy. A modest tile stove amounts to at least 800 kilograms, and
big ones (especially in the US and the former Soviet Union) can weigh up
to 5 tonnes, or more. Smaller models exist, but they lose some
advantages compared to their larger brothers (they have to be stoked
more often, and do not always reach a complete wood combustion, or the
same energy efficient output).


masonry heater needs to be large and heavy, there is nothing one can do
about that. Metal heating appliances have the indisputable advantage of
being compact.

Masonry stoves also cost 2 to 3 times as much as other heating systems.
Since the energy consumption costs are lower, and a well-built oven
stove lasts a lifetime, this investment pays itself back after a while.
However, you have to be able to afford the purchase.

In Finland, a major producer of soapstone heaters, the purchase of an
oven stove is subsidized by the government, with the consequence that 90
percent of new houses has them inside.

Oven stoves are expensive because they are products of
[craftsmanship](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/craftsmanship/). They are
not really suited for mass production (although efforts are being made),
and are therefore not of much interest to the heating industry. They
prefer to sell, for example, pellet stoves.

Pellet stoves

A pellet stove is the only wood stove that reaches a complete combustion
like an oven stove does. [Sophisticated
technology](http://mypelletstove.com/appliances/pellet-stoves/how-do-pellet-stoves-work.html)
is used to accomplish this – which is also the weak point of this
heating system.


pellet stove needs electricity to power all the high-tech (conveyor
belt, ventilation, temperature regulation, and so on), which means that
this electricity use should be taken into account when calculating the
environmental score. Furthermore, a pellet stove stops delivering heat
when there is a breakdown.

A pellet stove can only be fed with pellets, small rods made of wood,
which are processed in a factory. Pruned wood or sawed wood are of no
use in a pellet stove. [Producing these pellets requires a lot of
energy](http://www.ffp.au.poznan.pl/PDF%20PL/36/36-8.pdf).

Another consequence is that once again you are dependent on the
unpredictable prices of an energy supplier. Also, a pellet stove mainly
heats up the air and hardly emits any radiant heat, so there is no
health advantage compared to a wood stove, a gas stove or a central
heating system. Thanks to all the high-tech inside, however, a pellet
stove costs as much as an oven stove.

Fake oven stoves

Now that oven stoves are gaining some popularity again, the
manufacturers of metal heating appliances try to get a slice of the pie.
A few have started offering them according to traditional methods,
sending masons to your house to build whatever oven stove you desire.

Most manufacturers, however, now use radiant heat as a greenwash
promotion strategy. There are now stoves on the market that look like an
oven stove, only they are not. They are normal metal stoves, wrapped in
tiles. They betray themselves by grates to let in cool air, something an
oven stove does not need (see picture below).


Of course the tiles get hot when the stove is running, but they cool
down just as fast when it is turned off. These appliances are promoted
as an ideal combination of both technologies, but they are simply
convection stoves. They hardly emit any radiant heat, they scorch dust
and they have a lower performance. Yet, they sell.

Another example is this [German wood
stove](http://www.firetube.de/start/start.htm), pictured below. It is
enthusiastically being promoted as a modern variant of an oven stove,
and it will appeal to
[steampunks](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/steampunk/) and
survivalists, yet this is just a plain wood stove, not very efficient
and very polluting.


Burning the woods

The oven stove is the only technology that allows a clean burning of
wood without the need for another energy input, and thus it is the only
technology that promises an environmentally friendly alternative for the
dwindling resources of gas and oil.

The crucial question is whether the earth can produce enough wood to
keep a significant amount of people warm. Today’s energy crisis is not
the first in human history. Starting in the 15th century, some countries
in Europe already faced a serious shortage of firewood and this became
an acute problem in the 17th and 18th century, which only got “resolved”
by the arrival of coal.

It seems impossible that the present European population could again be
warmed by wood, because there are now many more people than in those
times. But there is some hope that the potential is larger than
expected.

The massive deforestation in the Middle Ages was the consequence of the
fireplace, which needs ten times as much fuel as an oven stove (wood was
also the main construction material). Even though the tile stove is
almost 10 centuries old, it only broke through on a large scale in the
19th century, and even then only in some European countries.

The potential of the technology was never fully developed because of the
start of the industrial revolution, and the abundance of coal. Research
has yet to reveal how large the potential of wood as a fuel can be if we
would use oven stoves, but it is surely greater than if we would return
to wood stoves.

© Kris De Decker (edited by Vincent Grosjean). Thanks to [De Twaalf
Ambachten](http://www.de12ambachten.nl/English/index%20english.html)

More Low-tech Heating:

-   [Restoring the Old Way of
    Warming]({filename}/posts/heating-people-not-spaces.md):
    Heating People, not Places
-   [Radiant & Conductive Heating
    Systems]({filename}/posts/radiant-and-conductive-heating-systems.md):
    Alternatives to Tile Stoves
-   [Insulation: First the Body, then the
    Home]({filename}/posts/body-insulation-thermal-underwear.md):
    Themal Underwear
-   [Heat your Clothes, not your
    House]({filename}/posts/heat-your-clothes-not-your-house.md):
    Electrically Heated Clothing
-   [The Solar
    Envelope]({filename}/posts/solar-oriented-cities-1-the-solar-envelope.md):
    How to Heat and Cool Cities without Fossil Fuels
-   [The Revenge of the Circulating
    Fan]({filename}/posts/circulating-fans-air-conditioning.md):
    Personal Cooling

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
   
   
   
   
 ------------------------------------------------------------------------

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Pictures :

-   
    Medieval oven stoves: [Furnologia](http://www.furnologia.de/)
-   Russian oven stoves: [Kuznetsov's
    Stoves](http://www.stove.ru/index.php?lng=1&rs=2) / Flickr:
    [1](http://www.flickr.com/photos/dollyray/1750893472/) &
    [2](http://www.flickr.com/photos/konnysonny/2922155590/)
-   Swedish oven stoves: [Stockholms Läns
    Museum](http://www.lansmuseum.a.se/byggnadsvard/kakelugn.cfm?in_idnr=169)
-   Swiss oven stoves: [Albert Iten](http://www.a-iten-ag.ch/)
-   Irish oven stoves:
    [Biofire](http://www.biofire.ie/kachelofen.shtml?ref=root)
-   German & Austrian oven stoves: [Bernthaner &
    Co](http://www.bernthaner.at/) / [LEHMO](http://www.lehmo.at/) /
    [Peter Nikol](http://www.kunstoefen.de/nl/start.htm) /
    [Flickr](http://www.flickr.com/photos/abberdab/130381222/)
-   American oven stoves: [The Masonry Heater Association of North
    America](http://mha-net.org/html/gallery.htm) / [Gimme Shelter
    Construction](http://www.gimmeshelteronline.com/masonry/index.php?orphan=http://www.gimmeshelteronline.com/masonry/portfolio.html)
    / [Masonry Stove Builders](http://www.heatkit.com/)
-   Graphics:
    [here](http://www.ceramicstoday.com/articles/kachelofen_de.htm) and
    [here](http://kachelofen-schneider.de/cms/cms/front_content.php?idcat=19)[.](http://www.lowtechmagazine.be/)

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Related Articles:

-   
    [Tiles as a substitute for
    steel]({filename}/posts/tiles-vaults.md) :
    the art of timbrel vaulting allowed for structures that today no
    architect would dare to build without steel reinforcements.
-   [Medieval
    smokestacks]({filename}/posts/peat-and-coal-fossil-fuels-in-pre-industrial-times.md):
    fossil fuels in pre-industrial times
-   [The bright future of solar powered
    factories]({filename}/posts/solar-powered-factories.md):
    we need a renewable source of heat energy
-   [Hoffmann
    kilns]({filename}/posts/hoffmann-kilns-brick-and-tile-production.md)
    : a giant version of the oven stove can manufacture bricks and tiles
    in an energy-efficient way
-   [The Museum of Old
    Techniques]({filename}/posts/the-museum-of-old-techniques.md)
    : historical alternatives to modern day machinery.
-   [Solar Heating System with Water
    Battery](http://www.notechmagazine.com/2011/05/solar-heating-system-with-water-battery.html):
    an inflatable swimming pool could heat your house
-   [Heat your house with car tyres and
    earth]({filename}/posts/heat-your-house.md)
    : earthships
-   [Wind powered
    factories]({filename}/posts/history-of-industrial-windmills.md)
    : the history (and future?) of industrial windmills.
-   [Wood gas
    vehicles]({filename}/posts/wood-gas-cars.md)
    : firewood in the fuel tank

[Main page](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/)

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Low-tech Magazine's headquarters :



Not, of course: this is [Luther's
room](http://www.flickr.com/photos/organist2007/2421320992/) in
Wartburg, Germany (16th century)

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
