Title: Get wired (again): Trolleybuses and Trolleytrucks
Date: 2009-07-10 01:18
Author: Kris De Decker
Category: Low-tech Solutions
Tags: cargotram, cities, trolleybuses, trolleytrucks
Slug: trolleytrucks-trolleybuses-cargotrams
Status: published


large-scale introduction of electric cars faces many technological
hurdles and promises to be time-consuming and expensive.

Greening public transportation and cargo traffic, on the other hand,
could be done fast with existing technology for a reasonable price - if
we opt for the trolleybus and the trolleytruck.


A trolleybus (or "trackless trolley") can be defined in two ways; as an
electric bus that gets its power from overhead cables, or as a tram (or
"street car") that drives on rubber tyres. Whichever way you look at it,
this combination of bus and tram is the most ecological (motorised)
means of transport that exists in the world today.

Just like all other electrically powered vehicles (cars, trains, trams)
a trolleybus does not produce exhaust fumes, is more efficient than
vehicles with a combustion engine, and can drive on renewable energy.
The trolleybus, however, has interesting advantages over other electric
vehicles.

Cheap, fast, durable

A trolleybus does not need a battery. In this way, it bypasses the weak
point of electric cars. [Batteries limit the mileage of electric cars to
a maximum of 100
miles]({filename}/posts/the-status-quo-of-electric-cars-better-batteries-same-range.md),
which means that the vehicles require an elaborate infrastructure for
fast-charging or swapping batteries (see "[Who killed the electric
grid?]({filename}/posts/fast-charging-electric-cars-off-peak-grid.md)").
Batteries also make electric vehicles heavy and thus less energy
efficient than when hooked up to an overhead line - a battery makes up
at least one third of the weight of an electric car.

A trolleybus also has advantages compared to other means of electric
public transport. Contrary to a train or a tram, a trolleybus does not
need a rail infrastructure. This not only results in huge cost and time
savings, it also saves a large amount of energy (see for instance this
paper: "[Envirnmental assessment of passenger transportation should
include infrastructure and supply
chains](http://www.iop.org/EJ/article/1748-9326/4/2/024008/erl9_2_024008.pdf?request-id=be050c6a-1f7b-4d85-83d6-76b91671bf98)",
pdf). Installing a trolleybus service is of course more expensive than
installing a normal bus line, but that extra cost can be recovered
because of lower fuel and maintenance costs.



Furthermore, a trolleybus has better braking power than a tram and it is
better at climbing hills, since rubber tyres have more grip than steel
wheels on steel rails. Trolleybuses are also compatible with bicycles
because cyclists cannot get stuck in the tracks. They are more
manoeuvrable than trams - a badly parked car will not stop them, because
they can diverge from their track for a couple of metres.

Political advantage

Being public transport, trolleybuses of course have the same advantages
as trams; they use much less energy and
[space](http://bp0.blogger.com/_k8Y0SWU8PJM/Rym__7u6Z_I/AAAAAAAAACk/55XpSWglWoE/s1600-h/espacio+coches.jpg?)
per passenger than cars. The trolleybus is not only cheap and
ecologically sound, it is also fast to implement. There is no need to
break up the road, no need to install a charging infrastructure; just
attach overhead lines and off you go. This is a political advantage. The
announcement and implementation of a system can happen in the same term
of service. Because trolleybuses are cheaper than trams, they can also
be used on trajectories where a tram would not find sufficient
passengers to be cost-effective.

History and evolution

The first trolleybus got hooked up in 1882; the
[Elektromote](http://www.obus-ew.de/e4102elektromo.htm), built by Ernst
Werner von Siemens. However, it took almost 20 more years before the
first commercial line was installed - in Bielatal, close to Dresden in
Germany. During the first half of the twentieth century, and especially
since the 1930s, the trolleybus was a success story. Around 1950, there
were some 900 trolleybus systems operating worldwide. A large share of
these was done away with in the 1960s and 1970s, mostly to the advantage
of private cars and diesel buses.

Still, in many cities, the trolleybus never disappeared. Today 359
cities worldwide still operate trolleybus lines, the number of buses is
estimated at 40,000. Most trolley services are located in the former
Soviet Union and Eastern Bloc countries - probably another reason for
their lousy image. The 1,300 kilometre network in Moscow is the largest
in the world - it has 1,500 buses and 100 lines.



Minsk, the capital of Belarus, has the second largest network in the
world with 1,050 buses and 68 lines. Saint Petersburg has the fourth
largest network in the world with 735 buses spread across 41 lines
(following Beijing, China, in third place). Ukraine has trolleybuses in
more than 25 cities and it boasts the longest trolley line in the world:
[85 kilometres from Yalta to
Simferopol](http://www.blacksea-crimea.com/Places/trolleybuses.html).
The three largest networks in the European Union are Athens, Riga and
Bucharest. Belgrade, Bratislava, Budapest, Kiev and Sofia are other
former Eastern Bloc cities with large trolleybus networks.

Outside Europe

Switzerland has trolleybuses in 13 cities. Dozens of other cities in
Europe have smaller networks. Outside Europe there are trolleybus
systems in the US (Boston, Cambridge, Philadelphia, Dayton, San
Francisco, Seattle), Canada (Vancouver, Edmonton), Central-America
(Mexico City, the largest network in the Americas), Latin-America
(Argentina, Brazil, Ecuador, Chile) and Asia (China, North-Korea).
(sources: [1](http://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oberleitungsbus#Gegenwart) /
[2](http://www.tbus.org.uk/systems.htm) /
[3](http://www.tbus.org.uk/article.htm)).

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The capital investment of the 19 kilometre line in Quito was less than
60 million dollar - hardly sufficient to build 4 kilometres of tram
line, or about 1 kilometre of metro line.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Obviously, the technology works, because otherwise it would not have
been in service for such a long time in so many places. This cannot be
said of electric cars, which all but disappeared in the 1920s.

Inferior technology

Compared to diesel buses, trolleybuses do have a couple of
disadvantages. A trolleybus is more manoeuvrable than a tram, but less
so than a diesel bus. If the road is being repaired or rebuilt in a
street where trolleybuses pass, chances are that the line has to be
discontinued temporarily. A diesel bus can easily be re-routed. Similar
to trams, trolleybuses also cannot overtake each other.

The most important drawback of trolley systems is the need for [overhead
cables]({filename}/posts/small-windmills-test-results.md).
They are generally regarded as ugly and meet protest. Especially at
crossroads the cable network can be dense and hard to ignore. Similar to
trams, the "tracks" of trolleybuses have points, but the whole mechanism
of these hangs in the air. We adore wireless technology and that is
probably the reason why trolleybuses are regarded as a ridiculous and
inferior technology, a relic from the past.



Hybrid trolleybuses provide an answer to most of these disadvantages. By
equipping trolleybuses with a battery or an auxiliary diesel motor, the
bus can also cover a part of the route without depending on the overhead
cables. Most trolleybuses built since 1990 are equipped with at least a
small battery or diesel motor for some limited manoeuvring. This can
save the installation of overhead cables, especially at turning points
and in sheds, where normally a complicated infrastructure is needed to
manoeuvre the buses. It can also help to get round road works.

On some lines (like in Boston and Philadelphia) hybrid trolley services
exist. The bus then covers part of the route on electricity delivered by
the overhead cables, while another part is covered by means of a
(larger) battery or a diesel engine. In this way some drawbacks of
batteries and diesel engines are introduced, but these disadvantages are
limited when compared to electric cars or diesel buses. Hybrid buses
might be a way to spare some parts of a city of overhead lines.

New trolleybus lines

Although some cities have recently decided to stop their (modest)
trolley services (Ghent in Belgium, Innsbruck in Austria, Marseille in
France and Edmonton in Canada), there are many more cities that have
recently expanded or modernised their network, re-introduced
trolleybuses, or introduced them for the first time.

In France, the trolley lines in Limoges, Saint-Étienne and Lyon (the
largest network in France) have recently been expanded and renewed. One
line in Nancy (abolished in 1998) will be restored in 2010. In Athens
the full fleet of 350 vehicles has been renewed. In Italy trolleybuses
have been re-introduced in Rome in 2005 (only one line) and new systems
are coming in Lecce, Avellino en Pescara. The system in Bari will be
re-opened. A dozen other Italian cities have never abolished their
trolley services and do not have any intention of doing so.



Castellón de la Plana, a city in Spain, re-introduced trolleybuses in
2007, the service was expanded in 2008. In Salzburg (the largest network
in Austria with 80 buses and 7 routes) the service was recently
expanded. A new system is [planned](http://www.tbusleeds.org.uk/) in
Leeds in the United Kingdom, which would be the first re-introduction of
trolleybuses in the UK in 30 years. Vancouver in Canada renewed its
buses in 2007 and 2008, Wellington in New Zealand did the same. Even
Ethiopia announced a trolleybus system in 2008.

El Trole

The most spectacular progress is made in South-America. This has
everything to do with "[El
Trole](http://www.publictransit.us/ptlibrary/eltrole.htm)", the
[trolleybus network in Quito](http://www.tramz.com/ec/q/b1.html)
(below), the capital of Ecuador with 1.6 million inhabitants. The
already impressive network, built in 1995, was
[expanded](http://www.tramz.com/ec/q/bm.html) in 2000 and 2008. On a
part of the main line (with a length of 19 kilometres) the trolleybuses
make use of exclusive lanes, completely separated from other traffic.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

If we want to, we can do the switchover in just a few years time.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

During peak hours, there is a bus every 50 to 90 seconds (because of the
high frequency, there are no schedules). El Trole transports 262,000
passengers each day. Five other trolleybus lines connect to it, as well
as several other bus lines (including Ecovía, a line
[similar](http://www.nytimes.com/2009/07/10/world/americas/10degrees.html?_r=1&hpw)
to El Trole but using diesel buses). The average distance between stops
is 400 metres.



The system in Quito is being copied in Mérida (Venezuela), the first
part of that line opened in 2007 (picture below). Other cities in Latin
America study the possibility of installing a similar infrastructure,
and the Quito system was also the inspiration for the proposals in
[England](http://www.tbus.org.uk/home.htm) and
[Scotland](http://www.scottishelectrictransit.org.uk/) (second and third
picture below).

By choosing the cheaper trolleybus over tram or metro, Quito could
develop a much larger network in a shorter time. The capital investment
of the 19 kilometre line was less than 60 million dollar - hardly
sufficient to build 4 kilometres of tram line
([source](http://209.85.135.132/search?q=cache:RfrFv5CxGNMJ:www.sxd.sala.ubc.ca/11_news/tyee_tram_june5_08.pdf+cost+for+building+one+kilometre+tram+line&cd=1&hl=en&ct=clnk&gl=es&client=firefox-a)),
or about 1 kilometre of metro line
([source](http://www.skyscrapercity.com/showthread.php?p=39000502#post39000502)).
Lower investment costs also mean lower ticket fares, and thus more
passengers.

Furthermore, the system is [well
devised](http://www.iges.or.jp/APEIS/RISPO/inventory/db/pdf/0044.pdf)
(pdf). There is only one ticket fare, payment happens in the station,
not on the bus. Stops are comfortable and built to get fast in and out
of the bus, there are very good connections with other lines (sometimes
via the same stop), and thanks to the exclusive lanes and (at some
crossroads) automatically controlled traffic lights the system is
extremely reliable. In Quito, the bus always arrives on time.



Unfortunately, El Trole has become a victim of its own success. The
Ecuadorian government now plans to [convert (the larger part of) the
main line](http://www.publictransit.us/ptlibrary/eltroleupdate1.htm) to
a much more expensive light rail line
([TRAQ](http://www.innovar-uio.com/web/galerias/traq/TRAQ-book.pdf),
pdf, in Spanish), arguing that the network is saturated. A protest group
consisting of citizens and traffic engineers ("[Quito para
todos](http://www.quitoparatodos.org/)") opposes the 500 - 750 million
dollar plan and
[demands](http://www.quitoparatodos.org/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=32:no-al-tren-ligero-traq&catid=14:documentos&Itemid=24)
that the money is used to extend of the trolleyline instead:

*"The same investment required to build the 20 to 30 km of light rail
would build 250 km of exclusive lanes for trolleybuses including
vehicles, stations and terminals. Quito's system of rapid urban mass
transport would be complete, providing efficient service, with money
left over for construction of bikeways throughout the city, for recovery
and integration of public spaces, widening of sidewalks, planting trees
and providing urban furniture, building walkways between bus stops and
passenger destinations, and other projects to complement the system, in
such a way to be able to have a city with an optimal public transport
service, placing us in the lead among cities with the best public
transport in the world."*



Whatever the outcome in Quito will be, the many advantages of a
trolleybus line should not lead to the conclusion that light rail
systems are evil or unnecessary. When passenger capacity grows, it can
make sense to convert the busiest trolleylines to light rail systems.
The income of a popular trolleyline might serve to finance the
succeeding rail network. Another compromise: [rail-guided
trolleys](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bombardier_Guided_Light_Transit).
These vehicles have rubber tyres but are guided by one rail in the
middle, which makes it possible to use longer vehicles.

Trolleytrucks

Trolley systems can also be used for the transport of goods.
"Trolleytrucks" are a lesser known technology but have an equally long
history. Initially, they were as popular as trolleybuses, transporting
goods between factories and train stations. Especially the German
engineer Max Schiemann put together [some remarkable
examples]({filename}/posts/electric-road-trains-in-germany-1901-1950.md)
in the beginning of the 20th century.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

There are more elegant options than trolleytrucks, like underground
freight networks. Cost, however, is a serious obstacle.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The technology never really took off, though. Trolleytrucks are still
sporadically used in Russia and Ukraine
([pictures](http://englishrussia.com/?p=736)), and in the mining
industry (below, [more
pictures](http://hutnyak.com/Trolley/trolleyhistory.html#InternationalSalt)).
However, in the latter case, the electric engine does not replace the
diesel engine, but merely assists it.


Another historical example is the "[Valtellina Dam
Project](http://hutnyak.com/Trolley/trolleyhistory.html#Valtellina)" in
Italy (below). These two lines with a total length of 80 kilometres were
built in 1936 and remained in service until 1962. Twenty trolleytrucks
transported concrete, sand and other construction materials to build two
large dams.




Today there are no cities that plan a trolleytruck system, but the
German city of Dresden does have a [Cargo
Tram](http://www.railfaneurope.net/pix/de/trams/Dresden/CarGoTram/pix.html)
(see below, it is also being tested in
[Amsterdam](http://www.citycargo.nl/over.htm)). From there it is only
one step to a trolleytruck service, as imagined by [this
inventor](http://trolleytruck.eu/).



Trolleytrucks and trolleybuses are also [put
forward](http://www.tbus.org.uk/trolleylorry.htm) as a solution in the
2008 book "Transport Revolutions: moving people and freight without
oil". Authors Richard Gilbert and Anthony Perl propose a plan that would
include 500 billion tonne-kilometres of cargo moved by "trolleylorry" in
the US by 2025. Trolleytrucks would replace trucks, and complement cargo
trains.

High-tech alternatives to trolley systems

There are more elegant options than trolleytrucks, with the same
advantages, like the [underground freight
networks]({filename}/posts/a-world-without.md)
we discussed before. Cost, however, is a serious obstacle. Another
alternative for both trolleybuses and trolleytrucks are (wireless)
[electric buses and trucks](http://www.theoildrum.com/node/5263), but
they too will always be much more expensive, and also less efficient
than trolleys - then we are talking about batteries again.


a bus or truck has a mileage of 100 kilometres, and you have to drive
120 kilometres, you are in trouble. This problem can be solved in two
ways. You can put more batteries in your vehicle, but then you increase
the cost and the weight and you lower the cargo or passenger space.

Or you can set up [fast-charging stations or battery swapping
stations]({filename}/posts/fast-charging-electric-cars-off-peak-grid.md)
along the way, but then you increase the costs even more. It gets worse
when you start thinking of [wirelessly charged buses and
trucks](http://www.carectomy.com/tokyo%E2%80%99s-plugless-plug-in-hybrid-bus/).
This is a technology that no doubt appeals to more people than
trolleybuses do, but it will always be less efficient and more
expensive.

All too often we are blind for the costs of high-tech. If we cannot
afford a technology, it is of not much use. Low-tech options that have
been proven to work can deliver much better results for a bargain. The
technology to completely electrify land based transportation has been
available for over a hundred years. If we want to, we can do the
switchover in just a few years time. Let's start with public transport
and cargo traffic, and then let's see what to do with cars - if we still
need them.

[Trolleycars]({filename}/posts/bumper-cars-o-1.md),
even though theoretically possible, are not a practical option.

© Kris De Decker (edited by Vincent Grosjean).

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Related articles:



-   [Aerial
    ropeways]({filename}/posts/aerial-ropeways-automatic-cargo-transport.md):
    even more efficient than trolleytrucks
-   [Cargo cyclists replace truck drivers on European city
    streets]({filename}/posts/jobs-of-the-future-cargo-cyclist.md)
-   [How to downsize a transport
    network]({filename}/posts/the-chinese-wheelbarrow.md):
    the Chinese wheelbarrow
-   [Early trolleytruck convoys in
    Germany]({filename}/posts/electric-road-trains-in-germany-1901-1950.md)
-   [The status quo of electric
    cars]({filename}/posts/the-status-quo-of-electric-cars-better-batteries-same-range.md):
    better batteries, same range
-   [Electric
    velomobiles]({filename}/posts/electric-velomobiles.md):
    as fast and comfortable as automobiles, but 80 times more efficient
-   [Why the electric car has no (wireless)
    future]({filename}/posts/bumper-cars-o-1.md)
-   [Who killed the electric
    grid?]({filename}/posts/fast-charging-electric-cars-off-peak-grid.md)
    fast-charging electric cars
-   [The age of
    speed]({filename}/posts/speed-energy.md):
    low-tech energy efficiency
-   [Sailing at the touch of a
    button]({filename}/posts/sailing-ships-large-crew-automated-control.md):
    wind-powered, computer-controlled
-   [Trolley canal
    boats]({filename}/posts/trolley-canal-boats.md)
-   [Planes on
    wheels]({filename}/posts/planes-on-whe-1.md):
    high speed trains
-   [Cars - out of the
    way]({filename}/posts/get-rid-of-cars-ride-a-bicycle.md):
    we don't need no bicycle infrastructure
-   [The
    velomobile]({filename}/posts/the-velomobile-high-tech-bike-or-low-tech-car.md):
    high-tech bike or low-tech car?
-   [A world without
    trucks]({filename}/posts/a-world-without.md):
    underground freight networks
-   [Low-tech cars](http://www.notechmagazine.com/low-tech-cars/)
-   [Only idiots travel by
    train]({filename}/posts/train-travel.md)
-   [Wood gas
    vehicles]({filename}/posts/wood-gas-cars.md):
    firewood in the fuel tank

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
