Title: Leave the algae alone
Date: 2008-04-04 17:19
Author: Kris De Decker
Editor: Vincent Grosjean
Category: High-tech Problems
Slug: algae-fuel-biof
Status: published



While the first generation of biofuels is wreaking havoc on the
environment and the food markets, the second generation is set to make
things even worse.

Since it has become clear that ethanol and biodiesel made from food
crops are doing more harm than good, the hope for finding a substitute
for oil has shifted to algae and cellulose. If we can believe the
advocates of this ‘second generation’ of biofuels, these combustibles
will deliver way more energy than it takes to make them, without
threatening the world’s food and water supplies. Upon taking a closer
look, however, this is very hard to believe. They might even cause
bigger problems than biofuels made from food crops. Maybe this time
around we could sort this out before the damage gets done?

## The biofuel disaster

Just two years ago, ethanol and biodiesel were heralded by almost
everybody as a green substitute for oil. Today, almost everybody
realizes that it is a [foolish
idea](http://www.sfgate.com/cgi-bin/article.cgi?f=/g/a/2008/04/02/cstillwell.DTL).
Several studies have confirmed by now that it takes as much or even more
energy to produce biofuels than they can deliver themselves.

That’s because the crops have to be planted, fertilized, harvested,
transported, and converted into fuel, all processes that require fossil
energy. If one also takes into account the land that is cleared to plant
the energy crops, biofuels [have
become](http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/abstract/1151861v1?maxtoshow=&HITS=10&hits=10&RESULTFORMAT=&fulltext=biofuels&searchid=1&FIRSTINDEX=0&resourcetype=HWCIT)
an [extra source of greenhouse
gases](http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/abstract/1152747v1?maxtoshow=&HITS=10&hits=10&RESULTFORMAT=&fulltext=biofuels&searchid=1&FIRSTINDEX=0&resourcetype=HWCIT),
while they were meant to lower them. Biofuels also helped to fuel a rise
in food prices by competing for agricultural land. And very recently it
also became clear that their production
[poisons](http://www.carectomy.com/index.php/Politics/Ethanol-Production-is-Spreading-the-Dead-Zone)
[water
bodies](http://www.nytimes.com/2008/03/11/us/11biofuel.html?ex=1362888000&en=04026f001dce187f&ei=5088&partner=rssnyt&emc=rss).

In spite of this horrible record, both the European Union and the United
States keep encouraging ethanol and biodiesel, mainly with the excuse
that there is a 'second generation' of green fuels on the way,
particularly cellulosic ethanol and algal fuel, which have no harmful
effects. Sadly, this promises to be another dangerous illusion.


## Cellulosic ethanol disaster

It is too early to say whether or not cellulosic ethanol can ever be
produced with a net energy gain as a result – at the moment, it is
impossible. We can only hope that scientists will never succeed, because
what we do know for sure is that cellulosic ethanol will be an even
larger threat to the world’s food supply than the first generation of
biofuels.

Cellulosic ethanol is not made from the edible parts of crops, but from
their stalks, roots and leaves. It can also be made of non-edible
plants, like
[switchgrass](http://www.wired.com/science/planetearth/magazine/15-10/ff_plant?currentPage=all).
Therefore, at first sight, it seems unlikely that turning cellulose into
fuel could present a danger for agriculture. However, there is one,
literally invisible problem: the soil.

In nature, the concept of waste does not exist. The so-called “waste”
that we plan to transform into fuel, is an essential element to keep the
soil productive. Leaves, twigs and stalks are decomposed by underground
organisms, which turn it into humus that can feed a next generation of
plants.

If you take away this material, the soil will become less and less
fertile until all you are left with is a desert. Of course, this process
can be offset by adding more and more artificial fertilizers. But,
here's the rub: fertilizers are made from fossil fuels. Almost 30
percent of energy use in agriculture is attributed to fertilizer
production (both their production process and their content). This means
that the more energy we produce from cellulose, the more energy we will
need to keep the soil fertile. In short: this makes no sense.

The first generation of biofuels might endanger the world’s food supply,
but that process is reversible. We can decide at any moment to change
our minds and use the corn to make food instead of fuel. A similar
deployment of cellulosic fuels would destroy our agricultural soils,
without any chance to repair them afterwards. We will have mined the
soil – a process that is irreversible, because when the soil becomes too
exhausted, even fertilizers are of no help. Cellulosic ethanol is a
dangerous illusion. And if you don’t believe me, [ask any soil
scientist](http://www.culturechange.org/cms/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=107&Itemid=1).

Nevertheless, as was announced earlier this week, the first cellulosic
ethanol plant is scheduled to start working in 2009 (even despite the
fact that scientists agree that a net energy gain is not yet possible).

## The algae fuel disaster

Also earlier this week, the first algal fuel production facility went
online and that generated lots of
[excitement](http://www.ecogeek.org/content/view/1490/70/). If we can
believe the hype, it will not take long before we drive our cars and fly
our planes on fuel made by algae. The figures sound impressive. Algae
are expected to be able to produce 10,000 gallons of fuel per acre per
year (some say 20,000 gallons), compared to 700 gallons for palm oil and
less than 100 gallons for corn and soy.

Algae could also be used as a jet fuel and as a source to make plastics
and detergents. Moreover, all this can be done with nothing more than
sunlight and CO2 – and [without the need for any potable
water](http://www.greenfuelonline.com/technology.html). If algal fuel
plants are placed next to fossil fuel plants, as some companies are
planning to do, the algae could even capture the CO2 from the emissions
of the coal or gas plant. As one ecogeek summarized; “Welcome to the
future, where single-celled plants eat our pollution and power our
cars.”

>There are very detailed figures on the amount of energy that will come
out of the process, yet it is very hard to find any information on the
energy and resources needed to make this energy output possible.

This sounds too good to be true. If you take a closer look at the claims
of these companies, essential information seems to be missing. They
present very detailed figures on the amount of energy that will come out
of the process, yet it is very hard if not impossible to find any
information on the energy and resources needed to make this energy
output possible.

If algae don't produce more energy than it takes to produce them,
driving cars on algal fuel does not make much sense. And if they also
use resources that are needed by agriculture, the game might not be
worth the candle. These are important questions, as we have learned from
the ethanol and biodiesel fiasco, yet nobody seems to wait for the
answers.

Some twenty companies are planning commercial facilities to make algal
fuel, often backed up by petroleum businesses and government subsidies
(see
[here](http://earth2tech.com/2008/03/27/15-algae-startups-bringing-pond-scum-to-fuel-tanks/)
and
[here](http://www.assetallocationinsights.com/2008/03/hope-blooms-and-green-as-money.html)
for an overview).

## Water in the desert

Algae have higher photosynthetic efficiencies than most plants, and they
grow much faster. Up to 50 percent of their body weight is oil, compared
to about 20 percent for oil-palm trees. They don’t need fertile ground,
so that they can be grown on soil that is not suitable for agriculture.

All this sounds very good, but algae also need a few things, most
notably: a lot of sunshine and massive amounts of water. To grow algae,
you also need
[phosphorus](http://www.greenfuelonline.com/gf_files/Performance%20Summary%20Report.pdf)
(besides other minerals), an element that is [very much needed by
agriculture]({filename}/posts/Low-tech Solutions/recycling-animal-and-human-dung-is-the-key-to-sustainable-farming.md).

<!-- 
*Design of a desert algae production facility : where does the
water come from?*
 -->
Most algae are grown in brackish or salt water. That sounds as if water
is no issue, since our planet has not a shortage of salt water. However,
just like solar energy plants, algae plants are best located in very
sunny regions, like deserts.

But, in deserts, and in very sunny places in general, there is not much
water to find. That’s not a problem for solar plants, because they don’t
need it. But, how are you going to get seawater to your desert algae
plant? Check the websites of all these companies: not a word about it.

There are not that many possibilities. You can transport seawater to the
desert, but that's going to cost you an awful lot of energy, probably
more than what can be produced by the algae. You can also take
freshwater from more nearby regions or underground aquifers and turn it
into artificial seawater. But, you promised that algal fuel would not
compete with food production. A third option is to put your algae plant
next to the sea.

>"Algae need a lot of sunshine and huge amounts of water - how do you get
seawater to the desert?"

Now, there are places which are both close to the sea and have lots of
sun. But chances are slim that they are as cheap and abandoned like
deserts are. Most likely, they are already filled up with tourists and
hotels, to name one possibility. So you might be forced to look for a
less sunny place close to the sea – which inevitably means that your
energy efficiency is going down. Which again raises the question: will
the algae deliver more fuel than is needed to make them?

How much water does algae production need? This information is nowhere
to find. “A lot” would be a good bet for an answer, since it’s not
enough to fill up the ponds or tanks just once. The water has to be
supplemented regularly. Being able to produce 10,000 gallons of fuel per
acre per year might sound impressive, but what really counts is how many
gallons of fuel you can produce with a certain amount of *water*.

## Contamination

The water issue is not the only “detail” that threatens the energy
efficiency of algal fuel. Compared to other plants, the photosynthetic
efficiency of algae is high – almost 3 times that of sugar cane for
instance. Compared to solar energy, however, the energy efficiency of
algae is very low – around 1 percent, while solar panels have an
efficiency of at least 10 percent, and solar thermal gets 20 percent and
more.

So why would we choose algae over solar energy? One reason might be that
it takes quite some energy to [produce solar
panels]({filename}/posts/High-tech Problems/the-ugly-side-o.md),
while algae can be grown in an open shallow pond with nothing else but
sunshine and CO2, which the organisms take from the atmosphere. You will
still need energy to turn the algae into a liquid fuel, but other than
that no energy input is needed.

However, these low-tech methods (comparable to growing corn, soy or palm
trees to make ethanol or biodiesel) are being left behind for more
efficient ones, using closed glass or polycarbonate bioreactors and an
array of high-tech equipment to keep the algae in optimal conditions.

Even though some companies still prefer open ponds (like the PetroSun
plant that started production last week), this method has serious
drawbacks. The main problem is contamination by other kinds of algae and
organisms, which can replace the energy producing algae in no time.
Ponds also need a lot of space, because sunlight only penetrates the
upper layers of a water body. It's the surface of the pond that counts,
not the depth.

## The laws of physics

Transparent aquariums (called closed bio-reactors) solve all the
problems of open ponds. These bioreactors can be placed inclined or
suspended from the roof of a greenhouse so that they can catch more sun
on a given surface. And since they are closed, no other organisms can
enter. However, this method introduces a host of [other
issues](http://www.oilgae.com/). Bioreactors have a higher efficiency,
but they also use considerably more energy.

First of all, you have to build an array of structures: the glass or
polycarbonate containers themselves, the metal frames, the greenhouses.
The production of all this equipment might consume less energy (and
money) per square meter than the production of solar panels, but you
need much more of it because algae are less efficient than solar plants.

Moreover, in closed bioreactors, CO2 has to be added artificially. This
is done by bubbling air through the water by means of gas pumps, a
process that needs energy. Furthermore, the containers have to be
emptied and cleaned regularly, they have to be sterilized, the water has
to be kept at a certain temperature, and minerals have to be added
continuously (because also here, just as with cellulosic ethanol,
"waste" materials are being removed). All these processes demand extra
energy.

Are algal fuel producers taking these factors into account when they
claim efficiencies that are 100 times higher than the ones from
biodiesel and ethanol? Only they know. It could be that these businesses
are greatly overestimating their energy gains in order to attract
capital.

One of the few critics of algal fuel, Krassen Dimitrov,
[calculated](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/krassen-dimitrov-greenfuel.html)
that the figures of [GreenFuel
Technologies](http://www.greenfuelonline.com/) are defying the laws of
physics. The company says that he is wrong, but his calculations surely
look more convincing than the virtually non-existant information on
their website (update May 2009: [GreenFuel Technologies shuts
down](http://news.cnet.com/8301-11128_3-10239916-54.html)).

## Feeding algae from smokestacks

Several companies plan to hook up their production facilities to a
fossil fuel energy plant, in order to capture the CO2 and nitrogen
emissions and "feed" them to the algae. This method is hailed as a way
of reducing greenhouse gases emitted by coal and gas plants, which is a
ridiculous claim. It's very curious that this capturing technology is
criticized when used in the context of "clean" coal, but applauded when
it is used to make algal fuel. In both cases, [capturing CO2 from
smokestacks raises the energy use of the power plant by at least 20
percent]({filename}/posts/High-tech Problems/carbon-capture.md).


>"It's curious that capturing CO2 from power plants is criticized when
used in the context of 'clean' coal, but applauded when it is used to
make algal fuel"

That not only makes the technology very expensive, it also means that
more coal or gas has to be mined, transported and burned. Algal fuel can
even be considered a worse idea than "clean" coal. In the "clean" coal
strategy, at least the CO2 is captured with the intention to store it
underground.

In the case of algae, the CO2 is captured only with the intention to
release in the air some time later, by a car engine. Last but not least,
capturing CO2 from power plants ties algal fuel production to fossil
fuels. If we switch to solar energy, where will the algal fuel producers
get their CO2 from?

## Outsourcing energy use

Are algae producers considering the extra use of energy that arises by
the capture of the CO2 when they claim that algae can deliver 100 times
more energy than first generation biofuels?

This seems very doubtful. All these claims have one thing in common:
they focus only on a small part of the total energy conversion chain.

A very good example is the story of
[Solazyme](http://www.solazyme.com/), a company that cultivates
(genetically modified) algae in non-transparent steel containers,
similar to those of breweries. In this case the algae do not get their
energy from the sun, but from sugar that is fed to them. This method,
says the company, makes them produce [1,000 times more
oil](http://www.greenfuelsforecast.com/ArticleDetails.php?articleID=481)
than they do in sunlight, because sugar is a much more concentrated form
of energy than sunlight.

But, where does the sugar come from? The researchers simply leave that
part of the process out of their calculation, and nobody seems to care.
Growing sugar cane of course requires significant amounts of energy,
land and water.

In fact, by turning off photosynthesis, the researchers eliminate the
only advantage of algae compared to other plants: their higher energetic
efficiency. The photosynthetic efficiency of sugar cane is not even half
that of algae, which means that if the whole energy chain would be
considered, this process can only be worse than that of algae produced
in transparent bioreactors.

## Stop this madness

While the first generation of biofuels is wreaking havoc on the
environment and the food markets, the second generation is getting ready
to make things only worse. Behind the scenes, scientists are already
working on the third generation, whatever that may be.

In five or ten years time, when it becomes clear that algal fuel is
devouring our water and energy resources and cellulosic ethanol is
mining our agricultural soils, we will be promised that the third
generation will again solve all the problems of the previous generation.

>"Producing fuels out of food crops could be a useful and sustainable
solution if our energy consumption would not be so ridiculously high"

It might be a better solution to bury the whole idea of biofuels right
here and now and focus on
[real]({filename}/posts/Low-tech Solutions/trolleytrucks-trolleybuses-cargotrams.md)
[solutions]({filename}/posts/Low-tech Solutions/speed-energy.md).
The trouble with biofuels is not the technology, but our unrealistic
expectations. Producing fuels out of food crops could be a useful and
sustainable solution if our energy consumption would not be so
ridiculously high.

All our habits, machines and toys are built upon an extremely
concentrated form of energy, fossil oil, and trying to replace that fuel
with a much less concentrated form is simply impossible. In 2003,
Jeffrey Dukes
[calculated](http://globalecology.stanford.edu/DGE/Dukes/Dukes_ClimChange1.pdf)
that 90 tons of prehistoric plants and algae were needed to build up one
gallon of gasoline. We burn this amount of organic material to drive 25
miles to pick up some groceries.

In one year, the world burns up 400 years of prehistoric plant and algae
material. How can we ever expect to fulfill even a small part of our
fuel needs by counting on present plant and algae material? The problem
we have to fix is our [energy
consumption](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/energy_consumption/).
Biofuels, from whatever generation, only distract us from what really
should be done.


### Updates

1. Scientists warn of [lack of vital
phosphorus](http://business.timesonline.co.uk/tol/business/industry_sectors/natural_resources/article4193017.ece)
as biofuels raise demand (June 2008).

2. [How much energy does it take to construct algal
factories?](http://ergobalance.blogspot.com/2008/11/oil-from-algae-how-big-do-containers.html)
Chris Rhodes from Energy Balance made an eye-opening calculation
(November 2008).

3. [The water footprint of
bioenergy](http://www.pnas.org/content/early/2009/06/03/0812619106)
(April 2009): barley, cassava, maize, potato, rapeseed, rice, rye,
sorghum, soybean, sugar beet, sugar cane, wheat and jatropha. Algal fuel
is not included, but the results are significant. It takes 1,400 to
20,000 litres of water to produce 1 litre of biofuel.

4. Amid a sea of troubles, ethanol now has an [antibiotics
problem](http://www.grist.org/article/2009-04-07-ethanols-antibiotics-problem/)
(April 2009).

5. [If you grow jatropha in marginal conditions, you can expect marginal
yields](http://e360.yale.edu/content/feature.msp?id=2147). (May 2009)

6. [GreenFuel Technologies shuts
down](http://news.cnet.com/8301-11128_3-10239916-54.html). (May 2009)

7. [Producing biofuels from algae generates high levels of greenhouse
gases](http://e360.yale.edu/content/digest.msp?id=2241&utm_source=feedburner&utm_medium=feed&utm_campaign=Feed%3A+YaleEnvironment360+%28Yale+Environment+360%29&utm_content=Google+Reader)
(January 2010)


### Related articles

-   [Wood gas
    vehicles]({filename}/posts/Obsolete Technology/wood-gas-cars.md)
    : firewood in the fuel tank
-   [The bright future of solar powered
    factories]({filename}/posts/Low-tech Solutions/solar-powered-factories.md):
    we need a renewable source of heat energy
-   [Trolleybuses and
    trolleytrucks]({filename}/posts/Low-tech Solutions/trolleytrucks-trolleybuses-cargotrams.md)
    : get wired (again)
-   [Who killed the electric
    grid]({filename}/posts/High-tech Problems/fast-charging-electric-cars-off-peak-grid.md)?
    Fast-charging electric cars
-   [The
    velomobile]({filename}/posts/Low-tech Solutions/the-velomobile-high-tech-bike-or-low-tech-car.md):
    high-tech bike or low-tech car?
-   [Viva Las
    Vegas]({filename}/posts/High-tech Problems/led-light-cfl-b.md)
    : the energy efficiency paradox
-   [Is ecotech the new
    asbestos?]({filename}/posts/High-tech Problems/nanotechnolog-1.md)
-   [Nuclear reactors, but no
    fuel]({filename}/posts/nuclear-react-1.html)[](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2007/08/nuclear-react-1.md):
    who's got the uranium?
-   [A history of
    sh\*t]({filename}/posts/Low-tech Solutions/recycling-animal-and-human-dung-is-the-key-to-sustainable-farming.md):
    recycling human dung is the key to sustainable farming
-   [12 small windmills put to the
    test]({filename}/posts/High-tech Problems/small-windmills-test-results.md)
    : size matters
-   [Carbon
    sequestration]({filename}/posts/High-tech Problems/carbon-capture.md)
    : bury the idea, not the CO2
-   [The age of
    speed]({filename}/posts/Low-tech Solutions/speed-energy.md) :
    how to reduce global oil consumption by 75 percent
-   [The status-quo of electric
    cars]({filename}/posts/High-tech Problems/the-status-quo-of-electric-cars-better-batteries-same-range.md)
    : better batteries, same range
-   [The ugly side of solar
    panels]({filename}/posts/High-tech Problems/the-ugly-side-o.md)
    : how much energy does it take to produce solar cells?
-   [Bike powered electricity generators are not
    sustainable]({filename}/posts/High-tech Problems/bike-powered-electricity-generators.md)

