Title: Why We Need a Speed Limit for the Internet
Date: 2015-10-19 16:45
Author: Kris De Decker
Category: High-tech Problems
Tags: energy use internet
Slug: can-the-internet-run-on-renewable-energy
Status: published



In terms of energy conservation, the leaps made in energy efficiency by
the infrastructure and devices we use to access the internet have
allowed many online activities to be viewed as more sustainable than
offline.

On the internet, however, advances in energy efficiency have a reverse
effect: as the network becomes more energy efficient, its total energy
use increases. This trend can only be stopped when we limit the demand
for digital communication.

Although it's a strategy that we apply elsewhere, for instance, by
encouraging people to eat less meat, or to lower the thermostat of the
heating system, limiting demand is controversial when applied to the
internet, in part because few people make the connection between data
and energy.

Picture: [Matthew
G](https://www.flickr.com/photos/streetmatt/15851429459/in/photolist-q9JHHV-bbhfj6-rdPrYE-6WpyLA-o1mSAi-cpUaqS-qMF7Tg-9ZQbb7-a39Vsb-6YkxLV-fo9Ypi-oTnmy1-rLqXQN-qR4WTF-brYcsr-bqwSte-bovvp6-nQb1F3-sgeU47-q8kWtT-o2KH4K-egpyFd-nxnfi7-jEGTiA-oUqbHS-o3nsh1-7ucC4b-ocdn19-bjVuP8-aZWVDe-aEnBFo-ag9bN2-abXLNk-xxQdLQ-o7cdiK-ykyzCN-xFa6v3-yBdNK5-ykzQsy-ykyzAd-ykzQjN-xFinza-yBdNp5-yCbzgx-yBdNiU-ykzQ85-ykyzh7-yBdNas-cGWeGY-n3vF2V).
CC.

How much energy does the internet consume? Due to the complexity of the
network and its fast-changing nature, nobody really knows. Estimates for
the internet's total electricity use vary by an order of magnitude. One
reason for the discrepancy between results is that many researchers only
investigate a part of the infrastructure that we call the internet.

In recent years, the focus has been mostly on the energy use of data
centers, which host the computers (the "servers") that store all
information online. However, in comparison, more electricity is used by
the combination of end-use devices (the "clients", such as desktops,
laptops and smartphones), the network infrastructure (which transmits
digital information between servers and clients), and the [manufacturing
process of servers, end-use devices, and networking
devices]({filename}/posts/embodied-energy-of-digital-technology.md).
\[1\]

A second factor that explains the large differences in results is
timing. Because the internet infrastructure grows and evolves so fast,
results concerning its energy use are only applicable to the year under
study. Finally, as with all scientific studies, researcher's models,
methods and assumptions as a base for their calculations vary, and are
sometimes biased due to beliefs or conflicts of interest. For example,
it won't suprise anyone that an investigation of the internet's energy
use by the American Coalition for Clean Coal Electricity sees much
higher electricity consumption than a report written by the information
and communication technology industry itself. \[2,3\]

Eight Billion Pedallers to Power the Internet
---------------------------------------------

Keeping all this in mind, we selected what seems to be the most recent,
complete, honest and transparant report of the internet's total
footprint. It concludes that the global communications network consumed
1,815 TWh of electricity in 2012. \[4\] This corresponds to 8% of global
electricity production in the same year (22,740 TWh). \[5,6\]

If we were to try to power the (2012) internet with [pedal-powered
generators]({filename}/posts/bike-powered-electricity-generators.md),
each producing 70 watt of electric power, we would need 8.2 billion
people pedalling in three shifts of eight hours for 365 days per year.
(Electricity consumption of end-use devices is included in these
numbers, so the pedallers can use their smartphones or laptops while on
the job). Solar or wind power are not much of a solution, either: 1,815
TWh equals three times the electricity supplied by all wind and solar
energy plants in 2012, worldwide. \[7\]



Today's internet can't be powered by renewable energy. Picture:
[Wikipedia
Commons](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Category:Wind_turbines_in_Germany#/media/File:20090109_xl_wiki_m_podszun-D50-0280.JPG).

These researchers estimate that by 2017, the electricity use of the
internet will rise to between 2,547 TWh (expected growth scenario) and
3,422 TWh (worst case scenario). If the worst-case scenario
materializes, internet-related energy use will almost double in just 5
years time. Note that further improvements in energy efficiency are
already included in these results. Without advances in efficiency, the
internet's energy use would double every two years, following the
increase in data traffic. \[8\]

Increasing Energy Consumption per User
--------------------------------------

Importantly, the increasing energy consumption of the internet is not so
much due to a growing amount of people using the network, as one would
assume. Rather, it's caused by a growing energy consumption per internet
user. The network's data traffic rises much faster than the number of
internet users (45% versus 6-7% annually). \[9\] There's two main
reasons for this. The first is the evolution towards portable computing
devices and wireless internet access. The second is the increasing bit
rate of the accessed content, mainly caused by the digitalization of TV
and the popularity of video streaming.

> The increasing energy consumption of the internet is not so much due
> to a growing amount of people using the network, as one would assume.
> Rather, it's caused by a growing energy consumption per internet user.

In recent years we have seen a trend towards portable alternatives for
the desktop computer: first with the laptop, then the tablet and the
smartphone. The latter is on its way to 100% adoption: in rich
countries, 84% of the population now uses a smartphone. \[9,4\] These
devices consume significantly less electricity than desktop computers,
both during operation and manufacture, which has given them an aura of
sustainability. However, they have other effects that more than off-set
this advantage.

First of all, smartphones move much of the computational effort (and
thus the energy use) from the end-device to the data center: the rapid
adoption of smartphones is coupled with the equally rapid growth in
cloud-based computer services, which allow users to overcome the memory
capacity and processing power limitations of mobile devices. \[4,11\]
Because the data that is to be processed, and the resulting outcome must
be transmitted from the end-use device to the data center and back
again, the energy use of the network infrastructure also increases.

High-Speed Wireless Internet
----------------------------

Robbing Peter to pay Paul can improve the total efficiency of some
computational tasks and thus reduce total energy use, because servers in
datacenters are managed more energy efficiently than our end-use
devices. However, this advantage surely doesn't hold for smartphones
that connect wirelessly to the internet using 3G or 4G broadband. Energy
use in the network is highly dependent on the local access technology:
the "last mile" that connects the user to the backbone of the internet.

A wired connection (DSL, cable, fibre) is the most energy efficient
method to access the network. Wireless access through WiFi increases the
energy use, but only slightly. \[12,13\] However, if wireless acces is
made through a cellular network tower, energy use soars. Wireless
traffic through 3G uses 15 times more energy than WiFi, while 4G
consumes 23 times more. \[14\] \[See also 4, 15\] Desktop computers were
(and are) usually connected to the internet via a wired link, but
laptops, tablets and smartphones are wirelessly connected, either
through WiFi or via a cellular network.



Wireless traffic through 3G uses 15 times more energy than WiFi, while
4G consumes 23 times more. Picture:
[jerry0984](https://www.flickr.com/photos/jerry0984/17037780397/in/photolist-rXz5wr-bK1ZH-q9b8hG-4a1m7o-bmLht9-beKeK6-aAQAMj-kWGfhg-7qCeXo-n1NG1g-pLd7WV-8S5wot-q9C9YP-qXHvAf-qRoTqh-8S5nrp-qzHwsC-qYVC5m-agsbX6-7NwPMX-6u1P3v-e3iFBK-goWtF5-cJKtaN-e3s7TC-7Shmsg-k2quYu-9R6a93-7zfToi-njpDbE-ak7nkz-oyGD-8CBHzu-dMpFMo-5wd8xw-8u2MTD-8aP6nN-k2qv1J-2ZeCgo-nybnwL-kapoM-9HKqYL-oQyrYT-6eG5eq-tqD6Rp-ge9RN8-4btraU-4K5amk-7UWR1g-k2oJGe).
CC.

Growth in mobile data traffic has been somewhat restricted to WiFi
"offloading": users restrict data connectivity on the 3G interface due
to significantly higher costs and lower network performance. \[4\]
Instead, they connect to WiFi networks that have become increasingly
available. With the advance of 4G networks, the speed advantage of WiFi
disappears: 4G has comparable or improved network throughput compared to
WiFi. \[14\] Most network operators are in the process of large-scale
rollouts of 4G networks. The number of global 4G connections more than
doubled from 200 million at the end of 2013 to 490 million at the end of
2014, and is forecast to reach 875 million by the end of 2015.
\[11,16,17\]

More Time Online
----------------

The combination of portable computing devices and wireless internet
access also increases the time we spend online. \[11\] This trend did
not start with smartphones. Laptops were expected to lower the energy
consumption of the internet, but they raised it because people took
advantage of the laptop's convenience and portability to be online far
more often. "It was only with the laptop that the computer entered the
living room". \[18\]

Smartphones are the next step in this evolution. They allow data to be
consumed in many places in and outside the home, alongside more
conventional computing. \[19\] For example, field research has revealed
that smartphones are intensively used to fill 'dead time'&mdash;small
pockets of time not focused on one specific activity and often perceived
as unproductive time: waiting, commuting, being bored, coffee breaks, or
"social situations that are not stimulating enough". Smartphones also
have become to play an important bedtime role, being called upon last
thing at night and first thing in the morning. \[19\]

> We are using our increasingly energy efficient devices for longer
> hours as we send more and more data over a worldwide infrastructure.

Noting these trends, it is clear that not every smartphone is a
substitute for a laptop or desktop computer. Both are used alongside
each other and even simulatenously. In conclusion, thanks to smartphones
and wireless internet, we are now connected anywhere and anytime, using
our increasingly energy efficient devices for longer hours as we send
more and more data over a worldwide infrastructure. \[19,20\]

The result is more energy use, from the mobile devices themselves, and
-- much more important&mdash;in the datacenters and in the network
infrastructure. Also, let's not forget that *calling* someone using a
smartphone costs more energy than callling someone using a dumbphone.

Increasing Bit Rates: Music & Video
-----------------------------------

A second key driver behind the growing energy consumption per internet
user is the increasing bit rate of content. The internet started as a
text-medium, but images, music and video have become just as important.
Downloading a text page requires very little energy. To give an example,
all the text on this blog, some 100 articles, can be packed into less
than 9 megabytes (MB) of data. Compare this to a single high-resolution
image, which easily gets to 3 MB, or a standard quality 8-minute YouTube
video, which ticks off at 30 MB&mdash;three times the data required for all
the words on this blog.

Because energy use rises with every bit of data, it matters a lot what
we're doing online. And as it turns out, we are increasingly using the
network for content with high bit rates, especially video. In 2012,
video traffic was 57% of all internet traffic (excluding video exchanged
through P2P-networks). It's expected to increase to 69% in 2017. \[21\]


are energy efficient. But mobile computing is not. Picture: [Nicolas
Nova](https://www.flickr.com/photos/nnova/15143063700/in/photolist-p59agb-dwF3pv-2GGGE-poW7dg-oJC1hX-pp28nG-bDsVHf-9mj8t1-a8wg5A-pFuTHh-rS3yE3-fEhJrB-abN4Q4-pFqB2x-gWt4A5-9U9Jnb-oJC3q4-s9zN1B-rS3xK7-eBtcSf-rS4VFG-poyfHB-uUeoFj-fvT5P7-fcEmHq-9piapU-oSrEyH-9bnK7g-idmyD4-byfGwH-efwgCH-dehe2h-eoxTxF-poW9ii-rG5gcX-qKaKcC-aeuiYT-pekyub-oWTfdz-fRVSdK-wzEoqy-7WHVGZ-dzjVLJ-kDk4xo-oTn4h7-egeb1W-drPu59-ktjEnW-jRwutZ-a9LP1n).

If video and wireless internet access are the key drivers behind the
increasing energy use of the internet, then of course wireless video is
the worst offender. And it's exactly that share of traffic that's
growing the fastest. According to the latest *Cisco Visual Networking
Index*, mobile video traffic will grow to 72% of total mobile data
traffic in 2019: \[11\]

> "When device capabilities are combined with faster, higher bandwith,
> it leads to wide adoption of video applications that contribute to
> increased data traffic over the network. As mobile network connection
> speeds increase, the average bit rate of content accessed through the
> mobile network will increase. High-definition video will be more
> prevalent, and the proportion of streamed content, as compared to
> side-loaded content, is also expected to increase. The shift towards
> on-demand video will affect mobile networks as much as it will affect
> fixed networks".

Power consumption is not only influenced by data rates but also by the
type of service provided. For applications such as email, web browsing,
and video and audio downloads, short delays are acceptable. However, for
real-time services&mdash;videoconferencing, and audio and video streaming
-- delay cannot be tolerated. This requires a more performant network,
and thus more energy use.

Does the Internet Save Energy?
------------------------------

The growing energy use of the internet is often explained away with the
argument that the network saves more energy than it consumes. This is
attributed to substitution effects in which online services replace
other more energy-intensive activities. \[13\] Examples are
videoconferencing, which is supposed to be an alternative for the
airplane or the car, or the downloading or streaming of digital media,
which is supposed to be an alternative for manufacturing and shipping
DVDs, CDs, books, magazines or newspapers.

Some examples. A 2011 study concluded that "by replacing one in four
plane trips with videoconferencing, we save about as much power as the
entire internet consumes", while a 2014 study found that
"videoconferencing takes at most 7% of the energy of an in-person
meeting". \[22,23\] Concerning digital media, a 2014 study concludes
that shifting all DVD viewing to video streaming in the US would
respresent a savings equivalent to the primary energy used to meet the
electricity demand of nearly 200,000 US household per year. \[24\] A
2010 study found that streaming a movie consumed 30 to 78% of the energy
of traditional DVD rental networks (where a DVD is sent over the mail to
the customer who has to send it back later). \[25\]

> Because the estimates for the energy intensity of the internet vary by
> four orders of magnitude, it's easy to engineer the end result you
> want.

There are some fundamental problems with these claims. First of all, the
results are heavily influenced by how you calculate the energy use of
the internet. If we look at the energy use per bit of data transported
(the "energy intensity" of the internet), results vary from 0,00064 to
136 kilowatt-hour per Gigabyte (kWh/GB), a difference of four orders of
magnitude. \[13,19\]. The researchers who made this observation conclude
that "whether and to what extent it is more energy efficient to download
a movie rather than buying a DVD, or more sustainable to meet via
videoconferencing instead of travelling to a face-to-face meeting are
questions that cannot be satisfyingly answered with such diverging
estimates of the substitute's impact." \[13\]

To make matters worse, researchers have to make a variety of additional
assumptions that can have a major impact on the end result. If
videoconferencing is compared to a plane trip, what's the distance
travelled? Is the plane full or not? In what year was it built? On the
other hand, how long does the videoconference take? Does it happen over
a wired or a wireless access network? Do you use a laptop or a high-end
telepresence system? When you're streaming music, do you listen to a
song once or twenty times? If you buy a DVD, do you go to the store by
car or by bike? How long is the trip? Do you only buy the DVD or do you
also shop for other stuff?

Time and Distance
-----------------

All these questions can be answered in such a way that you can engineer
the end result you want. That's why it's better to focus on the
mechanisms that favour the energy efficiency of online and offline
services, what scientists call a "sensitivity analysis". To be fair,
most researchers perform such an analysis, but its results usually don't
make it into the introduction of the paper, let alone into the
accompanying press release.

One important difference between online and offline services is the role
of time. Online, energy use increases with the time of the activity. If
you read two articles instead of one article on a digital news site, you
consume more energy. But if you buy a newspaper, the energy use is
independent of the number of articles you read. A newspaper could even
be read by two people so that energy use per person is halved.



High-end telepresence system. Source: [Wikipedia
Commons](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Videoconferencing#/media/File:Tandberg_Image_Gallery_-_telepresence-t3-side-view-hires.jpg).
Courtesy of Tandberg Cooperation.

Next to time there is the factor of distance. Offline, the energy use
increases with the distance, because transportation of a person or
product makes up the largest part of total offline energy consumption.
This is not the case with online activities, where distance has little
or no effect on energy consumption.

A sensitivity analysis generates very different conclusions from the
ones that are usually presented. For example: streaming a music album
over the internet 27 times can use more energy than the manufacturing
and transportation of its CD equivalent. \[26\] Or, reading a digital
newspaper on a desktop PC uses more energy than reading a paper version
from the moment the reading length exceeds one hour and a quarter,
taking the view that the newspaper is read by one person. \[27\] Or, in
the earlier mentioned study about the energy advantage of
videoconferencing, reducing the international participant's travel
distance from 5,000 to 333 km makes travelling in person more energy
efficient than videoconferencing when a high-end telepresence system is
used. Similarly, if the online conference takes not 5 but 75 hours, it's
more energy efficient to fly 5,000 km. \[23\]

Rebound Effects
---------------

The energy efficiency advantage of videoconferencing looks quite
convincing, because 75-hour meetings are not very common. However, we
still have to discuss what is the most important problem with studies
that claim energy efficiency advantages for online services: they
usually don't take into account rebound effects. A rebound effect refers
to the situation in which the positive effect of technologies with
improved efficiency levels is offset by systematic factors or user
behaviour. For example, new technologies rarely replace existing ones
outright, but instead are used in conjunction with one another, thereby
negating the proposed energy savings. \[28\]

Not every videoconference call is a substitute for physical travel. It
can also replace a phone call or an email, and in these cases energy use
goes up, not down. \[23\] Likewise, not every streamed video or music
album is a substitute for a physical DVD or CD. The convenience of
streaming and the advance of portable end-use devices with wireless
access leads to more video viewing and music listening hours \[24\], at
the expense of other activities which could include reading, observing
one's environment, or engaging in a conversation.

> A videoconference can also replace a phone call or an email, and in
> these cases energy use goes up, not down.

Because the network infrastructure of the internet is becoming more
energy efficient every year&mdash;the energy use per bit of data
transported continues to decrease&mdash;it's often stated that online
activities will become more energy efficient over time, compared to
offline activities. \[3\] However, as we have seen, the bit rate of
digital content online is also increasing.

This is not only due to the increasing popularity of video applications,
but also because of the increasing bit rate of the videos themselves.
Consequently, future efficiency improvements in the network
infrastructure will bring higher quality movies and videoconferencing,
not energy savings. According to several studies, bit rates increase
faster than energy efficiency so that green gains of online alternatives
are decreasing. \[23,24,25\]

Efficiency Drives Energy Use
----------------------------

The rebound effect is often presented as a controversial issue,
something that may or may not exist. But at least when it comes to
computing and the internet, it's an ironclad law. The rebound effect
manifests itself undoubtedly in the fact that the energy intensity of
the internet (energy used per unit of information sent) is decreasing
while total energy use of the internet is increasing.

It's also obvious in the evolution of microprocessors. The electricity
use in fabricating a microprocessor has fallen from 0.028 kWh per MHz in
1995 to 0.001 kWh per MHz in 2006 as a result of improvements in
manufacturing processes. \[29\] However, this has not caused a
corresponding reduction of energy use in microprocessors. Increased
functionality&mdash;faster microprocessors&mdash;has cancelled out the
efficiency gains per MHz. In fact, this rebound effect has become known
as *Moore's Law*, which drives progress in computing. \[28,29\]



While energy efficiency is almost universally presented as a solution
for the growing energy use of the internet, it's actually the *cause* of
it.

Picture:
[miniyo73](https://www.flickr.com/photos/miniyo73/8371683905/in/photolist-dKM4XF-aGSRsr-pwsJsG-aGSRaM-5seCHN-wCVXFc-z3FzK6-pSRMiv-qBeo56-pMcwE9-8pJWJV-dMrBxA-BLL8N-8kLCKi-r2tiqT-ycFU7S-9mg3Zz-g4ZN6D-rgjf2s-fw3WLc-cEpcUY-aoCJ5H-oEG1vb-2U2bT-penr48-dgagZ1-dMm3VD-9sVnJf-7XHVjx-goVRFZ-v58Cqf-v58BZq-v58Fyh-vmH4Up-vmH4pg-vn3Xrv-upSDuR-vmH3kT-v58yTW-vn3VJn-vn3Vna-vn42C6-v58Esb-v5gd3v-v58DrJ-rcd1ps-pFbREV-t55HMh-bJSXb4-8S4Xsi).

In other words, while energy efficiency is almost universally presented
as a solution for the growing energy use of the internet, it's actually
the *cause* of it. When computers were still based on vacuum tubes
instead of transistors on a chip, the power used by one machine could be
as high as 140 kilowatt. Today's computers are at least a thousand times
more energy efficient, but it's precisely because of this improved
energy efficiency that they are now on everybody's desk and in
everybody's pocket. Meanwhile, the combined energy use of all these more
energy-efficient machines outperforms the combined energy use of all
vacuum tube computers by several orders of magnitude.

Sufficiency
-----------

In conclusion, we see that the internet affects energy use on three
levels. The primary level is the direct impact through the
manufacturing, operation and disposal of all devices that make up the
internet infrastructure: end-use devices, data centers, network and
manufacturing. On a second level, there are indirect effects on energy
use due to the internet's power to change things, such as media
consumption or physical travel, resulting in a decrease or increase of
the energy use. On a third level, the internet shifts consumption
patterns, brings technological and societal change, and contributes to
economic growth. \[28,29\] The higher system levels are vastly more
important than the direct impacts, despite receiving very little
attention. \[29\]

> "\[The internet\] entails a progressive globalisation of the economy
> that has thus far caused increasing transportation of material
> products and people... The induction effect arising from the
> globalisation of markets and distributed forms of production due to
> telecommunication networks clearly leads away from the path of
> sustainability... Finally, the information society also means
> acceleration of innovation processes, and thus ever faster devaluation
> of the existing by the new, whether hardware or software, technical
> products or human skills and knowledge." \[28\]

Nobody can deny that the internet can save energy in particular cases,
but in general the overwhelming trend is towards ever-higher energy use.
This trend will continue unabated if we don't act. There's no constraint
on the bit rate of digital data. Blu-ray provides superior viewing
experience, with data sizes ranging between 25 and 50 GB&mdash;five to ten
times the size of a HD video. With viewers watching 3D movies at home,
we can imagine future movie sizes of 150 GB, while holographic movies go
towards 1,000 GB. \[25\]

Nor is there any constraint on the bit rate of wireless internet
connections. Engineers are already preparing the future launch of 5G,
which will be faster than 4G but also use more energy. There's not even
a constraint on the number of internet connections. The concept of the
"internet of things" foresees that in the future all devices could be
connected to the internet, a trend that's already happening. \[4,11\]
And let's not forget that for the moment only 40% of the global
population has access to the internet.


are no limits to growth when it comes to the internet, except for the
energy supply itself. Picture:
[Gongashan](https://www.flickr.com/photos/yanncb92/15185388700/in/photolist-p8T61y-q7hS9G-mQCsaE-podeEo-sBQZQR-njrXmR-qBzgVc-7Dg1rL-D3NJb-ohRqn5-7ELfHp-b2NN32-aGSV1n-sBDC4d-fHr5pX-eghTGo-dgah17-rBuFur-Fmu8N-6prZBn-dKM4XF-aGSRsr-pwsJsG-aGSRaM-5seCHN-wCVXFc-z3FzK6-pSRMiv-qBeo56-pMcwE9-8pJWJV-dMrBxA-BLL8N-8kLCKi-r2tiqT-ycFU7S-9mg3Zz-g4ZN6D-rgjf2s-fw3WLc-cEpcUY-aoCJ5H-oEG1vb-2U2bT-penr48-dgagZ1-dMm3VD-9sVnJf-7XHVjx-goVRFZ).

In short, there are no limits to growth when it comes to the internet,
except for the energy supply itself. This makes the internet rather
unique. For example, while the rebound effect is also [very obvious in
cars]({filename}/posts/citroen-2cv.md), there
are extra limits which impede their energy use from increasing unabated.
Cars can't get larger or heavier ad infinitum, as that would require a
new road and parking infrastructure. And cars can't increase their speed
indefinitely, because we have imposed maximum speed limits for safety.
The result is that the energy use of cars has more or less stabilized.
You could argue that cars have achieved a status of "sufficiency":

> "A system consuming some inputs from its environment can either
> increase consumption whenever it has the opportunity to do so, or keep
> its consumption within certain limits. In the latter case, the system
> is said to be in a state of sufficiency... A sufficient system can
> improve its outputs only by improving the efficiency of its internal
> process." \[30\]

The performance of cars has only increased within the limits of the
energy efficiency progress of combustion engines. A similar effect can
be seen in mobile computing devices, which have reached a state of
sufficiency with regard to electricity consumption&mdash;at least for the
device itself. \[30\] In smartphones, energy use is limited by a
combination of battery constraints: energy density of the battery,
acceptable weight of the battery, and required battery life. The
consequence is that the per-device energy use is more or less stable.
The performance of smartphones has only increased within the limits of
the energy efficiency progress of computing (and to some extent the
energy density progress of batteries). \[30\]

A Speed Limit for the Internet
------------------------------

In contrast, the internet has very low sufficiency. On the internet,
size and speed are not impractical or dangerous. Batteries limit the
energy use of mobile computing devices, but not the energy use of all
the other components of the network. Consequently, the energy use of the
internet can only stop growing when energy sources run out, unless we
impose self-chosen limits, similar to those for cars or mobile computing
devices. This may sound strange, but it's a strategy we also apply quite
easily to thermal comfort ([lower the thermostat, dress
better]({filename}/posts/body-insulation-thermal-underwear.md))
or transportation ([take the bike, not the
car]({filename}/posts/the-velomobile-high-tech-bike-or-low-tech-car.md)).

Limiting the demand for data could happen in many ways, some of which
are more practical than others. We could outlaw the use of video and
turn the internet back into a text and image medium. We could limit the
speed of wireless internet connections. We could allocate a specific
energy budget to the internet. Or, we could raise energy prices, which
would simultaneously affect the offline alternatives and thus level the
playing field. The latter strategy is preferable because it leaves it to
the market to decide which applications and devices will survive.

> Setting a limit would not stop technological progress. Advances in
> energy efficiency will continue to give room for new devices and
> applications to appear.

Although none of these options may sound attractive, it's important to
note that setting a limit would not stop technological progress.
Advances in energy efficiency will continue to give room for new devices
and applications to appear. However, innovation will need to happen
within the limits of energy efficiency improvements, as is now the case
with cars and mobile computing devices. In other words: energy
efficiency can be an important part of the solution if it is combined
with sufficiency.

Limiting demand would also imply that some online activities move back
to the off-line world&mdash;streaming video is candidate number one. It's
quite easy to imagine offline alternatives that give similar advantages
for much less energy use, such as public libraries with ample DVD
collections. Combined with measures that reduce car traffic, so that
people could go to the library using bikes or public transportation,
such a service would be both convenient and efficient. Rather than
replacing physical transportation by online services, we should fix the
transport infrastructure.

In the next articles, we investigate the low-tech information networks
that are being developed in poor countries. There, "sufficiency" is
ingrained in society, most notably in the form of a non-existing or
non-reliable energy infrastructure and limited purchasing power. We also
discuss the community networks that have sprung up in remote regions of
rich countries, and the designs for shared networks in cities. These
alternative networks provide much more energy efficient alternatives for
digital communication in exchange for a different use of the internet.

Kris De Decker (Edited by [Jenna
Collett](https://www.linkedin.com/pub/jenna-collett/1a/925/b3))

Sources:

\[1\] Even the most complete studies about the internet's energy use do
not take into account all components of the infrastructure. For example,
the embodied energy of the energy plants which are used to power the
internet is completely ignored. However, if you run a data center or
cellular tower on solar energy, it's obvious that the [energy it took to
produce the solar
panels]({filename}/posts/how-sustainable-is-pv-solar-power.md)
should be included as well. The same goes for the
[batteries]({filename}/posts/sustainability-off-grid-solar-power.md)
that store solar energy for use during the night or on cloudy days.

\[2\] "[The cloud begins with coal: big data, big networks, big
infrastructure, and big
powe](http://www.tech-pundit.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/Cloud_Begins_With_Coal.pdf)r"
(PDF), Mark P. Mills, National Mining Association / American Coalition
for Clean Coal Electricity, augustus 2013

\[3\] "[SMARTer2030&mdash;ICT Solutions for 21st Century
Challenges](http://smarter2030.gesi.org/downloads/Full_report.pdf)"
(PDF), Global e-Sustainability Initiative, 2015

\[4\] "[Emerging trends in electricity consumption for consumer
ICT](http://vmserver14.nuigalway.ie/xmlui/handle/10379/3563)", Peter
Corcoran, 2013

\[5\] "[Key Electricity
Trends](http://www.iea.org/publications/freepublications/publication/Electricitytrends.pdf)"
(PDF), IEA Statistics, 2015

\[6\] Of the total, 852 TWh was consumed by end-use devices, 352 TWh by
networks, 281 TWh by data centers, and 330 TWh during the manufacturing
stage.

\[7\] "[Worldwide electricity production from renewable energy sources,
edition
2013](http://www.energies-renouvelables.org/observ-er/html/inventaire/Eng/conclusion.asp)",
Observ'ER

\[8\] The researchers also provide a "best case scenario" in which
energy use increases only slightly. However, this scenario is already
superseded by reality. It supposes slow growth of wireless data traffic
and digital TVs, but the opposite has happened, as Cisco Visual
Networking Index \[11\] shows. Furthermore, the best-case-scenario
supposes a year-on-year improvement in energy efficiency of 5% for most
device categories and an annual improvement in efficiency of the core
network of 15%. These figures are well above those of past years and
thus not very likely to materialize. The expected growth scenario
supposes wireless traffic to grow to 9% of total network electricity
consumption, and digital TV to stabilize at 2.1 billion units. In this
scenario, energy efficiency improvements for devices are limited to 2%
per year, while energy efficiency in the core network is limited to 10%
per year. In the worst case scenario, wireless traffic grows to 15% of
total network electricity consumption, digital TV will keep growing, and
improvements in energy efficiency are limited to 1-5% annually for
devices and to 5% in the core network. \[4\]

\[9\] "[Measuring the Information Society Report
2014](https://www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/Documents/publications/mis2014/MIS2014_without_Annex_4.pdf)"
(PDF), International Telecommunication Union (ITU), 2014

\[11\] "[Cisco Visual Networking Index: Global Mobile Data Traffic
Forecast Update,
2014-2019](http://www.cisco.com/c/en/us/solutions/collateral/service-provider/visual-networking-index-vni/white_paper_c11-520862.html)",
CISCO, 2015.

\[12\] "[Small network equipment key product
criteria](https://www.energystar.gov/index.cfm?c=small_network_equipment.pr_crit_small_network_equipment)",
Energy Star, retrieved September 2015.

\[13\] "[The energy intensity of the internet: home and access
networks](http://publicationslist.org/data/lorenz.hilty/ref-229/2014_Coroama_Schien_Preist_Hilty_Energy_Intensity_Internet_Home_Access.pdf)"
(PDF), Vlad Coroama, 2014

\[14\] "[A close examination of performance and power characteristics of
4G LTE
networks](http://www.cs.columbia.edu/%7Elierranli/coms6998-7Spring2014/papers/rrclte_mobisys2012.pdf)"
(PDF), Junxian Huang, June 2012.

\[15\] "[Energy consumption in mobile phones: a measurement study and
implications for network
applications](http://ciir-publications.cs.umass.edu/getpdf.php?id=904)"
(PDF), Niranjan Balasubramanian, 2009

\[16\] "[4G networks to cover more than a third of the global population
this year, according to new GSMA intellligence
data](http://www.gsma.com/newsroom/press-release/4g-networks-to-cover-more-third-of-global-pop-this-year/)",
GSMA Intelligence, 2015

\[17\] Network equipment manufacturer Cisco notes in its 2015 report
that "as mobile network capacity improves and the number of multiple
device users grow, operators are more likely to offer mobile broadband
packages comparable in price and speed to those of fixed broadband."
\[11\] If this becomes true, and a majority of internet users would
routinely connect to the internet through 4G broadband, the energy use
of the network infrastructure would more than double, assuming data
traffic would remain the same. \[4\] That's because from an energy
perspective, the access network is the greedy part of any service
provider's network. The core network of optic cables is much more energy
efficient. \[4\]

\[18\] "[Are we sitting comfortably? Domestic imaginaries, laptop
practices, and energy use](http://epubs.surrey.ac.uk/769626/)". Justin
Spinney, 2012

\[19\] "[Demand in my pocket: mobile devices and the data connectivity
marshalled in support of everyday
practice](http://eprints.lancs.ac.uk/72677/4/paper277.pdf)" (PDF),
Carolynne Lord et al., Lancaster University, april 2015

\[20\] "[Towards a holistic view of the energy and environmental impacts
of domestic media and IT](http://adrianclear.com/holistic_home_it.pdf)",
Oliver Bates et al., 2014

\[21\] "Cisco Visual Networking Index 2012-2017", Cisco, 2013

\[22\] "[The energy and emergy of the
internet](http://www1.icsi.berkeley.edu/%7Ebarath/papers/emergy-hotnets11.pdf)"
(PDF), Barath Raghavan and Justin Ma, 2011

\[23\] "[Comparison of the energy, carbon and time costs of
videoconferencing and in-person
meetings](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0140366414000620)",
Dennis Ong, 2014

\[24\] "[The energy and greenhouse-gas implications of internet video
streaming in the united
states](http://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1748-9326/9/5/054007;jsessionid=715911A0C3BE2A2EAC4DE63F2ABF6E64.c1)",
2014

\[25\] "[Shipping to streaming: is this shift
green?](http://none.cs.umass.edu/papers/pdf/green07q-seetharam.pdf)",
Anand Seetharam, 2010

\[26\] "[MusicTank report focuses on environmental impact of streaming
platforms](http://www.completemusicupdate.com/article/musictank-report-focuses-on-environmental-impact-of-streaming-platforms/)",
CMU, 2012

\[27\] "[Screening environmental life cycle assessment of printed, web
based and tablet e-paper
newspaper](http://www.csc.kth.se/sustain/publications/reportfiles/sus_2007_1_moberg_et_al_report_updated.pdf)",
Second Edition, Asa Moberg et al, 2009

\[28\] "[Information Technology and Sustainability: essays on the
relationship between ICT and sustainable
development](http://www.amazon.de/gp/product/3837019705/)", Lorenz M.
Hilty, 2008

\[29\] "[Environmental effects of informantion and communications
technologies](http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v479/n7373/full/nature10682.html)",
Eric Williams, Nature, 2011

\[30\] "[Computing Efficiency, Sufficiency, and Self-Sufficiency: A
Model for
Sustainability](http://publicationslist.org/data/lorenz.hilty/ref-263/2015_Hilty_Limits.pdf)?"
(PDF), Lorenz M. Hilty, 2015

Related Articles:

-   [The Monster Footprint of Digital
    Technology]({filename}/posts/embodied-energy-of-digital-technology.md).
-   [How Sustainable is PV Solar
    Power]({filename}/posts/how-sustainable-is-pv-solar-power.md)?
-   [How Sustainable is Stored
    Sunlight]({filename}/posts/sustainability-off-grid-solar-power.md)?



Artwork by [Grace Grothaus.](http://www.gracegrothaus.com/)
