Title: Carbon sequestration: bury the idea, not the CO2
Date: 2008-06-29 16:04
Author: Kris De Decker
Category: High-tech Problems
Slug: carbon-capture
Status: published



Why introduce yet another expensive, energy-intensive and risky
technology if there are so many other and better ways of fighting global
warming?

Capturing CO2 from the smokestacks of power stations with the intention
of storing it in underground reservoirs, oceans, rocks, consumer
products, chemicals or fuels has gained a lot of credibility recently.
Many experts believe that we will burn the world's remaining fossil
fuels anyway, and we should therefore try to lower the impact if we are
to prevent a catastrophic climate change. Yet capturing, transporting
and storing carbon dioxide raises energy consumption considerably and
brings with it serious health and environmental problems. The benefits,
on the other hand, are shadowed in doubt.

  

src="http://pagead2.googlesyndication.com/pagead/show\_ads.js"&gt;  

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div>

"Capturing technology raises the energy consumption of a coal plant by
an average of 32 percent."

</div>

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Earlier this month leading science and energy institutes advocated
strongly for the development of carbon capture and storage technology.
The science academies of the world’s 13 major economic powers called the
implementation of carbon sequestration a “[top
priority](http://e360.yale.edu/content/digest.msp?id=1237)”. Around the
same time, the International Energy Association (IEA) argued for an
energy technology revolution, of which carbon capture and storage [forms
a vital
component](http://www.iea.org/Textbase/press/pressdetail.asp?PRESS_REL_ID=263).
Meanwhile, many spin-offs and start-ups are presenting all kinds of
"innovative" ideas that seem to differ substantially from the
traditional approach of storing CO2 in underground reservoirs.

Attractive idea

The idea of carbon capture and storage (CCS) – first introduced in the
1970s - is attractive at first sight. To begin with, it is a natural
occurrence. There are many natural reservoirs of CO2, which have kept
this gas contained for many millions of years. Secondly, the potential
for storage is significant. The available storage space in underground
reservoirs (depleted oil and gas reserves, coal formations and
especially saline formations) is probably large enough to store all the
carbon dioxide still contained in earth's remaining fossil fuel
reserves. It will take more research to find out which reservoirs are
suited to this and which ones are not, but finding the actual storage
space does not seem to be a fundamental obstacle. To add to this, the
technology for capture, transport and storage of CO2 is available.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------



*CO2 can be transported in gaseous, liquid and solid form, the latter
called dry ice - picture above. It can be kept at a temperature of minus
70 degrees Celsius and transforms directly to gas when it melts (hence
the name). One cubic metre of dry ice equals to 1.5 tonnes of carbon
dioxide, in gaseous form the same amount of CO2 takes up more than 500
m³. For transportation in pipelines, CO2 gas is compressed. For
transportation by ships, CO2 can be transported in any form. ([Picture
source](http://www.linde-gas.com/))*----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Technology is available

Capturing CO2 from smokestacks has been a common practice for many
years, for the purification of natural gas or at ammonia production
facilities for instance. Injection and storage of carbon dioxide is
already happening in the North Sea, in Algeria and in Texas. In these
cases, CO2 is injected into oil and gas reservoirs in order to extract
more fossil fuels than would otherwise be possible, a process called
Enhanced Oil Recovery (EOR). For some of these applications, carbon
dioxide is transported by pipeline or by ship.

A complete CCS infrastructure has not been demonstrated yet (all CO2
used for enhanced oil recovery is commercially produced or originates
from other sources than power plants, and present capture techniques do
not capture CO2 for storage but emit the gas in the atmosphere). Yet,
since all the individual parts exist, this does not seem to be an
obstacle either.

Energy penalty

The problem at hand is that the process of capturing, transporting and
storing carbon dioxide requires a vast amount of energy. If this energy
were to be derived directly from fossil fuels the benefits of the
CO2-savings by capture and storage will be offset by the very same
energy intensive process. If the energy were to come from renewable
sources the technology is rendered unnecessary as it would be much more
efficient to generate electricity directly from the renewable source.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div>

"If fuel use of electricity generation rises, the same goes for air
pollution from coal plants and for the ecological consequences of coal
mining. Storing the CO2 does not solve that."

</div>

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Capturing CO2 from smokestacks is the most energy-intensive part of the
process. According to the International Panel of Climate Change (IPCC),
which devoted [a comprehensive
study](http://arch.rivm.nl/env/int/ipcc/pages_media/SRCCS-final/IPCCSpecialReportonCarbondioxideCaptureandStorage.htm)
on the technology 3 years ago, capturing technology (including
compression for further transport and storage) [raises the energy
consumption of a coal plant by an average of 32
percent](http://arch.rivm.nl/env/int/ipcc/pages_media/SRCCS-final/SRCCS_Chapter3.pdf).

A coal plant equipped with CO2-capture technology would thus need 32
percent more coal and other resources like water, chemicals and reagents
to produce the same amount of electricity than the same power plant
without this technology. Carbon capture technology forms a symbiosis
with coal as a fuel (“clean coal”), since burning coal emits twice as
much greenhouse gasses than burning gas. Capturing CO2 from a gas power
plant requires less energy but is of not much use.

Pipeline infrastructure

This 32 percent does not include the energy needed to mine, process and
transport the many thousands of tonnes of extra coal, and it does not
include the energy needed for the construction of the capture,
transportation, storing and monitoring infrastructure either.

It is insufficient to simply place the smokestacks of a coal plant
upside down as suitable underground reservoirs do not necessarily lie
beneath the world's power stations. A carbon capture and storage
infrastructure requires a transport infrastructure consisting of
pipelines (and tankers) [that rivals the existing oil and gas
network](http://arch.rivm.nl/env/int/ipcc/pages_media/SRCCS-final/SRCCS_Chapter4.pdf).

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------



*© Picture of pipeline infrastructure in the US : [Ken
Flannery](http://www.flickr.com/photos/kenflannery/). Carbon capture and
storage requires a pipeline network that rivals the existing oil and gas
infrastructure.*----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Manufacturing and installing these thousands of kilometres of stainless
steel pipes will require a substantial amount of energy. Also, the
transport by ship or pipeline itself requires energy, and so does the
injection of the CO2 in underground reservoirs and the monitoring of the
whole transport network (today’s pipelines are patrolled by plane every
two weeks).

Everything taken together, CCS will probably raise energy consumption by
as much as 50 percent (this is an estimate as to my knowledge nobody
seems to have investigated this yet). Even if all of the CO2 is
eventually stored, a 50 percent increase in energy consumption is the
last thing that the world needs.

Coal mining

In addition, it is impossible to store all of the carbon dioxide.
Capturing technology can only capture 80 to 90 percent of CO2 from
smokestacks. Taking into account an additional energy use of 50 percent
this comes down to a reduction in CO2 emissions of only 70 to 85 percent
compared to a coal plant without carbon capture technology (and only if
all emissions coming from the additional energy use are captured as
well).

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div>

"Carbon capture and storage requires a transport infrastructure that
rivals the existing oil and gas pipeline network."

</div>

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

There are losses during transport, too. According to the IPCC these are
1 to 2 percent per 1,000 kilometres of pipeline transport and 3 to 4
percent per 1,000 kilometres of ship transport (the ship's fuel use
included). Carbon dioxide is also not the only harmful effect of power
generation. Burning coal brings with it serious air pollution and
produces waste, both of which will also rise by at least 30 percent. The
same goes for the ecological damage of coal mining, which is
[devastating](http://www.grist.org/news/maindish/2006/02/16/reece/).
Storing the CO2 can never prevent this.

Artificial trees

Because of all these disadvantages, researchers and entrepreneurs try to
invent [all
kinds](http://www.popularmechanics.com/science/earth/4267140.html?series=15)
of [other ways](http://www.ecogeek.org/content/view/1560/81/) to keep
carbon dioxide out of the atmosphere, like [storing CO2 in consumer
products](http://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2008/04/080408144824.htm),
[converting it to
fuel](http://www.treehugger.com/files/2008/06/algae-biofuels-coal-plants.php)
or [fixing it in rocks](http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/22506764/). Yet
until now, all these proposals face – at best – a similar energy
penalty.

That is mostly because the first step of the process is always the same:
capturing CO2 from the smokestacks of a coal plant will raise fuel
consumption by about 30 percent. The only alternative to this capture
technology – [sucking carbon dioxide out of ambient
air](http://cleantechnica.com/2008/04/26/co2-capture-and-technology-of-the-future/)
by means of ["artificial
trees"](http://www.physorg.com/news96732819.html)– consumes [even more
energy](http://withouthotair.blogspot.com/2008/06/last-thing-we-should-talk-about.html)
because the concentration of CO2 in ambient air is much lower than the
concentration of CO2 in
smokestacks.----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------



*Artificial trees, a technology proposed by Klaus Lackner of Columbia
University. Copyright Illustration [Stonehaven CCS,
Montreal](http://www.stonehaven.ca/index.html)
([via](http://www.ecofriend.org/entry/synthetic-trees-to-capture-carbon-dioxide-and-save-the-planet/)).*

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Turning CO2 in plastics

Besides, the storage potential of most of these alternative proposals is
very limited compared to that of the traditional CCS-concept. A strategy
that is getting a lot of attention these days is to store CO2 into
consumer products based on polymers like plastic bottles or DVD’s, or in
chemicals like those used in fertilizers,
[refrigeration](http://www.ecogeek.org/content/view/1799/) or food
packaging.

The idea is that it is better to do “something useful” with captured CO2
instead of just storing it underground. However, even though the amount
of chemicals and plastics we produce is enormous, [as a carbon sink they
are all but
meaningless](http://arch.rivm.nl/env/int/ipcc/pages_media/SRCCS-final/SRCCS_Chapter7.pdf).

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div>

"If all polycarbonates and polyurethane would be produced by means of
CO2 this would only store the emissions of 3 coal power plants."

</div>

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

According to the IPCC, producing all polycarbonates and polyurethane by
means of carbon dioxide would store 3.3 million tons of CO2 – comparable
to the annual emissions of just 3 coal power plants. China is building
one coal plant per week ([in large part to produce cheap goods for us to
buy]({filename}/posts/the-worlds-fact.md)) and
there are more than 100 coal plants on the drawing board in the US.

What makes this approach even more useless is that these consumer
products and chemicals have a relatively short lifespan, from a few
months for fertilizers to a few decades for plastic products. When the
fertilizers are used, or when the DVD’s end up in the incinerator, the
CO2 goes back into the atmosphere.

Burning algae

Using CO2 as a feeding stock for algae and then turning it into biofuel
- another idea that is
[hyped]({filename}/posts/algae-fuel-biof.md)
these days - faces the same problem. It only delays CO2-emissions for a
very short time. The carbon dioxide is converted into fuel which is
subsequently burned in a car engine.

It is impossible to capture CO2 from car engines since the gas is too
heavy (your car would gain serious weight while driving, and it would
have to pull a trailer to store the large volume of carbon dioxide).

One could argue that at least the CO2 is recycled and that we are using
the by-product of electricity generation to make fuel – which means that
we don’t have to dig up more fossil fuels to make gasoline. However,
this argument does not take into account the fact that much energy ([and
water]({filename}/posts/algae-fuel-biof.md)) is
lost in the conversion process.

Firstly, there is again the energy penalty of CO2 capture from the
smokestacks, on average 30 percent. Next, you have to build a huge
infrastructure to produce algae (since their energy efficiency is 100
times smaller than that of solar panels) and furthermore there is the
energy that gets lost during the process of turning algae to fuel. If
there is net energy gain in the end, it will be small.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div>

"Turning CO2 into algae could be an interesting strategy if we bury the
algae instead of burning them in our car engines. However, that’s not on
anyone’s mind."

</div>

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Turning CO2 into algae could be an interesting strategy to reduce
CO2-emissions if we store the algae underground instead of burning them
in our car engines (thus avoiding the energy-intensive process of
converting them into fuel). However, that’s not on anyone’s mind.

Fixing CO2 in rocks

The only alternative approach that really could store a significant
amount of CO2 is mineral carbonation: fixing carbon dioxide in rocks
(limestone). This method is also based on a natural process. Under the
influence of weathering, the surface of rocks combines with carbon
dioxide. Earth has no shortage of rocks, so the potential of this method
is large enough to store all possible future CO2-emissions.

But if we want the strategy to be useful for us, this natural chemical
reaction has to be accelerated considerably and that is again a very
energy-intensive process (rocks have to be crushed to powder in order to
provide more rock surface, and then treated with chemicals and heated).
According to the IPCC this method would raise energy consumption by 60
to 180 percent.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 
| limestone_mine.gif "Limestone_mine"){width="500"                      |
| height="375"}](http://krisdedecker.typepad.com/photos/uncategorized/2 |
| 008/06/28/limestone_mine.gif)                                         |
| *© picture limestone mine: [the stone                                 |
| company](http://www.the-stone-company.co.uk/minesandpacking.shtml)*   |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Capturing carbon dioxide in rocks would also [require a mining and
transport infrastructure that is comparable (and which would supplement)
today’s coal
industry](http://arch.rivm.nl/env/int/ipcc/pages_media/SRCCS-final/SRCCS_Chapter7.pdf).
To fix a tonne of CO2, you need 1.6 to 3.7 tonnes of rock. These rocks
have to be mined and transported to coal plants (some industrial wastes
and mining tailings can also be used, for example fuel ash from coal
plants or de-inking ash from the paper industry, but their total amounts
are way too small to substantially reduce CO2-emissions). The process
also generates large amounts of waste materials (apart from the
carbonised rocks themselves). For every tonne of carbon dioxide stored
in rock, you are left with 2.6 to 4.7 tonnes of disposable materials.

Atomic waste, meet your rival

Carbon capture technology is expected to become more energy-efficient in
the future. But that would hardly make the whole scheme more attractive.
Storing carbon dioxide in underground reservoirs (the only realistic
option) is [risky, not unlike the storing of atomic
waste](http://arch.rivm.nl/env/int/ipcc/pages_media/SRCCS-final/SRCCS_Chapter5.pdf).

CO2 can escape. High concentrations of the gas are lethal to plants,
animals and humans. Eventually the gas thins in the atmosphere but
during escape concentrations can build up fast, especially since CO2 is
denser than air. At concentrations above 2 percent in ambient air,
carbon dioxide has a strong effect on respiration (the normal
concentration in fresh air is 0.033 percent). At concentrations from 7
to 10 percent, it kills.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div>

"If CO2 escapes from storage reservoirs, the whole energy-intensive
operation of capturing, transporting and storing it was all for
nothing."

</div>

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Small impurities in the gas make it lethal at even lower concentrations.
Similar amounts in the soil kill vegetation and make groundwater
unsuitable for drinking or irrigation. And of course, if CO2 escapes
from storage reservoirs, the whole operation of capturing, transporting
and storing it was all for nothing. The result is a considerable rise in
emissions, because of the energy penalty involved (the energy use of the
whole process can go down, but it will never come close to zero).

Cement cork

As can be seen in the drawing below, storing CO2 in essence resembles
storing a gas in a stone pot. When an underground reservoir is filled
up, all injection wells are closed by a cement "cork". This cork has to
keep the gas inside for thousands of years.

Now zoom out and you are looking at a planet with thousands of holes,
each one sealed with a cork to keep inside a potentially deadly (and
climate warming) gas. Reassuring, no? Yet, this is considered a
high-tech solution. You also have a network of thousands of kilometres
of pipelines, transporting the same gas and connecting power plants with
these reservoirs.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------



----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

How big is the chance that leaks or sudden bursts will cause damage?
According to the IPCC, the risk is low, at least if all pipelines and
storage sites are monitored closely. Leaks will occur, they also occur
through cracks in natural CO2-reservoirs (sometimes killing vegetation,
animals and people), but if watched closely (by means of sensors and
computers) they could be stopped in time. Earthquakes or accidental
drilling operations in a former storage site could release large clouds
of the gas in a short time, but that should be prevented by using
carefully chosen locations and painstaking indexing of storage sites.

Oxygen supply

All these risks might be manageable in the short term, but storing CO2
is – just like storing atomic waste – a very irresponsible thing to do
in respect to future generations. Will people in 2178 still know where
CO2 was stored? Will the corks hold until that date? Risk analysis does
not seem to look too far ahead. Carbon capture will also bury a part of
our oxygen supply, by the way. After all, we would not only store the C
but also the O2. Oxygen is abundant in the atmosphere compared to
carbon, so this might not be a big problem, but again, nobody seems to
have investigated this yet.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div>

"Carbon capture will also bury a part of our oxygen supply. After all,
we would not only store the C but also the O2."

</div>

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Carbon storage in the oceans was radically disapproved of by the IPCC
because of the [even larger
risks](http://arch.rivm.nl/env/int/ipcc/pages_media/SRCCS-final/SRCCS_Chapter6.pdf),
yet the idea returned last week and seems to be [gaining
support](http://www.treehugger.com/files/2008/06/broecker-greenpeace.php)
even with green thinkers.

Real solutions, please

Why introduce yet another expensive, energy-intensive and risky
technology if there are so many other and better ways to solve the
energy crisis? If we choose to build a whole new infrastructure of
pipelines comparable to that of the existing oil and gas industry, why
not build something like an extensive [underground tubular freight
network]({filename}/posts/a-world-without.md)
instead? This would be a real solution, which would considerably lower
transport energy use and CO2-emissions.

Why not channel the [huge amounts of
money](http://arch.rivm.nl/env/int/ipcc/pages_media/SRCCS-final/SRCCS_Chapter8.pdf)
needed for the development of CCS to countries with tropical
rainforests, so that they have a very good reason to protect them
fiercely? Stopping deforestation, especially in tropical forests, would
contribute more to the fight against global warming than carbon capture
technology could ever do. Tropical forests store enormous amounts of
carbon and they are not prone to natural forest fires.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div>

"Halting deforestation in tropical forests would contribute more to the
fight against global warming than capture technology could ever do."

</div>

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Why not put into force a regulation that prohibits the construction of
any more power plants that burn non-renewable energy sources? There is
already an enormous energy capacity in the world, why don’t we chose to
do it with the energy plants that we have? This would at last make
energy efficiency useful (because progress in energy efficiency is now
always negated by new and more energy hungry products and services).
Still want more energy? Build a solar plant or plant a windmill.

These are just 3 ideas that would be effective without the need to adapt
our lifestyle (which is, of course, also the attraction of "clean
coal"). They would not solve everything, but at least they would be very
welcome steps into the right direction, towards a *solution*.

All high-tech carbon storage strategies described in this article are no
solutions, they are just attempts to limit the *problem*. Let’s hope
that the next appeal of the International Energy Association and of the
Science Academies of the world (an awful lot of brains there) will
contain a trace of innovative thinking.

© Kris De Decker (edited by Shameez Joubert & Vincent Grosjean)

[Comments
(10)](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2008/06/carbon-capture.html#comments)[](http://www.feedburner.com/fb/a/emailverifySubmit?feedId=1685209&loc=en_US)

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  ---
    
 ---

Related articles :

[]({filename}/posts/solar-powered-factories.md)


-   [The bright future of solar powered
    factories]({filename}/posts/solar-powered-factories.md):
    we need a renewable source of heat energy
-   [The solar
    envelope]({filename}/posts/solar-oriented-cities-1-the-solar-envelope.md):
    how to heat and cool cities without fossil fuels
-   [The world's factory
    hall]({filename}/posts/the-worlds-fact.md) :
    almost 30 percent of energy use and 35 percent of CO2-emissions in
    China comes from the production of export goods.
-   [How (not) to resolve the energy
    crisis]({filename}/posts/renewable-energy-is-not-enough.md)
    : first things first
-   [Leave the algae
    alone]({filename}/posts/algae-fuel-biof.md):
    while the first generation of biofuels is wreaking havoc on the
    environment and the food markets, the second generation is set to
    make things even worse.
-   [The age of
    speed]({filename}/posts/speed-energy.md) :
    how to reduce global oil consumption by 75 percent
-   [The monster footprint of digital
    technology]({filename}/posts/embodied-energy-of-digital-technology.md)
    : how much energy do our gadgets really use?
-   [Why the electric car has no (wireless)
    future]({filename}/posts/bumper-cars-o-1.md)
    : the e-car has a conceptual problem.
-   [Nuclear reactors, but no
    fuel]({filename}/posts/nuclear-react-1.md) :
    already in 10 to 15 years time, there will be a severe shortage of
    uranium.
-   [12 small windmills put to the
    test]({filename}/posts/small-windmills-test-results.md)
    : size matters



  

  

  

