Title: The monster footprint of digital technology
Date: 2009-06-16
Author: Kris De Decker
Category: High-tech Problems
Tags: microchips
Slug: embodied-energy-of-digital-technology
Status: published
Summary: FIXME

![image](/images/monster-footprint-digital-technology.jpg)
Artwork: [cityscape I & II by Grace Grothaus](http://gracegrothaus.com/).

The power consumption of our high-tech machines and devices is hugely
underestimated.

When we talk about energy consumption, all attention goes to the
electricity use of a device or a machine while in operation. A 30 watt
laptop is considered more energy efficient than a 300 watt refrigerator.
This may sound logical, but this kind of comparisons does not make much
sense if you don't also consider the energy that was required to
manufacture the devices you compare. This is especially true for
high-tech products, which are produced by means of extremely material-
and energy-intensive manufacturing processes. How much energy do our
high-tech gadgets really consume?




The energy consumption of electronic devices is skyrocketing, as was
recently reported by the International Energy Association ("[Gadgets and
gigawatts](http://www.iea.org/w/bookshop/add.aspx?id=361)"). According
to the research paper, the electricity consumption of computers, cell
phones, flat screen TV's, iPods and other gadgets will double by 2022
and triple by 2030. This comes down to the need for an additional 280
gigawatts of power generation capacity. An earlier report from the
British Energy Saving Trust ([The ampere strikes back](http://www.energysavingtrust.org.uk/Publication-Download/?p=4&pid=1085)- pdf) came to similar conclusions.

There are multiple reasons for the growing energy consumption of
electronic equipment; more and more people can buy gadgets, more and
more gadgets appear, and existing gadgets use more and more energy (in
spite of more energy efficient technology - the [energy efficiency
paradox]({filename}/posts/led-light-cfl-b.md)
[described]({filename}/posts/citroen-2cv.md)
[here]({filename}/posts/speed-energy.md)
[before]({filename}/posts/the-right-to-35.md)).

## The 180 watt laptop

While these reports are in themselves reason for concern, they hugely
underestimate the energy use of electronic equipment. To start with,
electricity consumption does not equal energy consumption. In the US,
utility stations have an average efficiency of about 35 percent. If a
laptop is said to consume 60 watt-hours of electricity, it consumes
almost three times as much energy (around 180 watt-hour, or 648
kilojoules).

So, let's start by multiplying all figures by 3 and we get a more
realistic image of the energy consumption of our electronic equipment.
Another thing that is too easily forgotten, is the energy use of the
infrastructure that supports many technologies; most notably the [mobile
phone
network]({filename}/posts/the-right-to-35.md)
and the [internet](http://www.greens.org/s-r/45/45-03.html) (which
consists of server farms, routers, switches, optical equipment and the
like).

## Embodied energy

Most important, however, is the energy required to manufacture all this
electronic equipment (both network and, especially, consumer
appliances). The energy used to produce electronic gadgets is
considerably higher than the energy used during their operation. For
most of the 20th century, this was different; manufacturing methods were
not so energy-intensive.

An old-fashioned car uses many times more energy during its lifetime
(burning gasoline) than during its manufacture. The same goes for a
refrigerator or the typical incandescent light bulb: the energy required
to manufacture the product pales into insignificance when compared to
the energy used during its operation.

![image](/images/monster-footprint-grace.jpg)

Advanced digital technology has turned this relationship upside down. A
handful of microchips can have as much embodied energy as a car. And
since digital technology has brought about a plethora of new products,
and has also infiltrated almost all existing products, this change has
vast consequences. Present-day cars and since long existing analogue
devices are now full of microprocessors. Semiconductors (which form the
energy-intensive basis of microchips) have also found their applications
in ecotech products like solar panels and LEDs.

## Where are the figures?

While it is fairly easy to obtain figures regarding the energy
consumption of electronic devices during the use phase (you can even
measure it yourself using a power meter), it is surprisingly hard to
obtain reliable and up-to-date figures on the energy consumed during the
production phase. Especially when it concerns fast-evolving
technologies. A life cycle analysis of high-tech products is extremely
complex and can take many years, due to the large amount of parts,
materials and processing techniques involved. In the meantime, products
and processing technologies keep evolving, with the result that most
life cycle analyses are simply outdated when they are published.

> The embodied energy of the memory chip alone already exceeds the energy
consumption of a laptop during its life expectancy of 3 years.

For more recent and emerging technologies, life cycle analyses simply do
not exist. Try looking for a research paper that calculates the embodied
energy of a Light Emitting Diode (LED), a lithium-ion battery or any
device full of electronics meant to save energy: you won't find it (and
if you do, please let me know).

## Embodied energy of a computer

The [most up-to-date life cycle analysis of a
computer](http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/Xplore/login.jsp?url=http%3A%2F%2Fieeexplore.ieee.org%2Fiel5%2F9100%2F28876%2F01299692.pdf&authDecision=-203)
dates from 2004 and concerns a machine from 1990. It concluded that
while the ratio of fossil fuel use to product weight is 2 to 1 for most
manufactured products (you need 2 kilograms of fuel for 1 kilogram of
product), the ratio is 12 to 1 for a computer (you need 12 kilograms of
fuel for 1 kilogram of computer). Considering an average life expectancy
of 3 years, this means that the total energy use of a computer is
dominated by production (83% or 7,329 megajoule) as opposed to operation
(17%). Similar figures were obtained for [mobile
phones]({filename}/posts/the-right-to-35.md).

![image](/images/circuitboard.jpg)

While the 1990 computer was a desktop machine with a CRT-monitor, many
of today's computers are laptops with an LCD-screen. At first sight,
this seems to indicate that the embodied energy of today's machines is
lower than that of the 1990 machine, because much less material
(plastics, metals, glass) is needed. But it is not the plastic, the
metal and the glass that makes computers so energy-instensive to
produce. It's the tiny microchips, and present-day computers have more
of them, not less.

## 100 years of manufacturing

The energy needed to manufacture microchips is disproportional to their
size. MIT-researcher [Timothy
Gutowski](http://web.mit.edu/ebm/www/publications.htm) compared the
material and energy intensity of conventional manufacturing techniques
with those used in semiconductor and in nanomaterial production (a
technology that is being developed for use in all kinds of products
including electronics, solar panels, batteries and LEDs).

> Digital technology is a product of cheap energy

As an example of more conventional manufacturing methods, Gutowski
calculated the energy requirements of machining, injection molding and
casting. All these techniques are still used intensively today, but they
were developed almost 100 years ago. Injection molding is used for the
manufacture of plastic components, casting is used for the manufacture
of metal components, and machining is a material removing process that
involves the cutting of metals (used both for creating and finishing
products).

## 6 orders of magnitude

While there are significant differences between configurations, all
these manufacturing methods require between 1 and 10 megajoule of
electricity per kilogram of material. This
[corresponds](http://www.unitconversion.org/energy/joules-to-watt-hours-conversion.html)
to 278 to 2,780 watt-hour of electricity per kilogram of material.
Manufacturing a one kilogram plastic or metal part thus requires as much
electricity as operating a flat screen television for 1 to 10 hours (if
we assume that the part only undergoes one manufacturing operation).

The energy requirements of semiconductor and nanomaterial manufacturing
techniques are much higher than that: up to 6 orders of magnitude
(that's 10 raised to the 6th power) above those of conventional
manufacturing processes (see figure below,
[source](http://web.mit.edu/ebm/www/publications.htm), [supporting
information](http://pubs.acs.org/doi/suppl/10.1021/es8016655/suppl_file/es8016655_si_001.pdf)).
This comes down to between 1,000 and 100,000 megajoules per kilogram of
material, compared to 1 to 10 megajoules for conventional manufacturing
techniques.

![image](/images/energy-use-manufacturing.microchips.jpg)

Manufacturing one kilogram of electronics or nanomaterials thus requires
between 280 kilowatt-hours and 28 megawatt-hours of electricity; enough
to power a flat screen television continuously for 41 days to 114 years.
These data do not include facility air handling and environmental
conditioning, which for semiconductors can be substantial.

## Embodied energy of a microchip

The energy consumption of semiconductor manufacturing techniques
corresponds with a life cycle analysis of a "typical" [2 gram
microchip](http://www.it-environment.org/1point7kg%20microchip.html)
performed in 2002. Again, this concerns a 32 MB RAM memory chip - not
really cutting edge technology today. But the results are nevertheless
significant: to produce the 2 gram microchip, 1.6 kilograms of fuel were
needed. That means you need 800 kilograms of fuel to produce one
kilogram of microchips, compared to 12 kilograms of fuel to produce one
kilogram of computer.

If we take the energy density of crude oil (45 MJ/kg), this comes down
to 72 megajoules (or 20,000 watt-hour) to produce a 2 gram microchip.
Converted to a one kilogram microchip this comes down to 3.3
megawatt-hours of electricity (or 36,000 MJ), well within the range of
the 280 kilowatt-hours (1,000MJ) and 28 megawatt-hours (100,000 MJ)
calculated above.

Also, the [International Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors 2007
edition](http://www.itrs.net/Links/2007ITRS/Home2007.htm) gives a figure
of 1.9 kilowatt-hours per square centimetre of microchip, so 20
kilowatt-hours per 2 gram, square centimetre computerchip seems to be a
reasonable estimate.

## How many microchips in a computer?

A gadget or a computer does not contain one kilogram of semiconductors -
far from that. But, we don't need a kilogram of microchips to ensure
that the manufacturing phase will largely outweigh the usage phase. The
embodied energy of the memory chip alone already exceeds the energy
consumption of a laptop during its life expectancy of 3 years.

Today's personal computers have a RAM-memory of 0.5 to 2 gigabyte
modules that typically consist of 18 to 36 two-gram-microchips (as the
ones described above). This equates to 1,296 to 2,595 megajoules of
embodied energy for the computer memory alone, or 360,000 to 720,000
watt-hour. Enough to power a 30 watt laptop *non-stop* for 500 to 1,000
days.

![image](/images/memory-chip.jpg)

Microprocessors (the "brains" of all digital devices) are more advanced
than memory chips and thus contain at least as much embodied energy.
Unfortunately, no life cycle analysis of a microprocessor has been
published. Certain is that modern computers contain ever more of them.

One trend in recent years is the introduction of "multicore processors"
and "multi-CPU systems". Personal computers can now contain 2, 3 or 4
microprocessors. Servers, game consoles and embedded systems can have
many more. Each of these "cores" is capable of handling its own task
independently of the others. This makes it possible to run several
CPU-intensive processes (like running a virus scan, searching folders or
burning a DVD) all at the same time, without a hitch. But with every
extra chip (or chip surface) comes more embodied energy.

> The energy savings realised by digital technology will merely absorb its
own growing footprint.

Another trend is the rise of the "Graphics Processing Unit" or GPU. This
is a specialised processor that offloads 3D graphics rendering from the
microprocessor. The GPU is indispensable to play modern videogames, but
it is also needed because of the ever higher graphical requirements of
operating systems. GPU's do not only raise the energy consumption of a
computer while in use (GPU's can consume more energy than current
CPU's), but they also stand for more embodied energy. A GPU is very
memory-intensive and thus also increases the need for more RAM-chips.

## Nanomaterials

Why are microchips so energy-intensive to manufacture? One of the
reasons becomes clear when you literally zoom in on the technology. A
microchip is small, but the amount of detail is fabulous. A
microprocessor the size of a fingernail can now contain up to two
billion transistors - each transistor less than 0.00007 millimetres
wide. Magnify this circuit and it becomes a structure as complex as a
sprawling metropolitan city.

![image](/images/energy-use-microchips.jpg)

The amount of materials embedded in the product might be small, but it
takes a lot of processing (and thus machine energy use) to lay down a
complex and detailed circuit like that. While the electricity
requirements of machines used for semiconductor manufacturing are
similar to those used for older processes like injection molding, the
difference lies in the process rate: an injection molding machine can
process up to 100 kilograms of material per hour, while semiconductor
manufacturing machines only process materials in the order of grams or
milligrams.

Another reason why digital technology is so energy-intensive to
manufacture is the need for extremely effective air filters and air
circulation systems (which is not included in the figures above). When
you build infinitesimal structures like that, a speck of dust would
destroy the circuit. For the same reason, the manufacture of microchips
requires the purest silicon (Electronic Grade Silicon or EGS, provided
by the energy-intensive CVD-process).

> The manufacture of nanotubes is as energy-intensive as the manufacture
of microchips.

Every 18 months the amount of transistors on a microchip doubles
(Moore's law). On one hand, this means that less silicon is needed for a
certain amount of processing power or memory. On the other hand, when
transistors become smaller, you need even more effective air filtration
and purer silicon. Since the structure also becomes more complex, you
need more processing steps.

![image](/images/grace-gothaus-microchip.jpg)

[Nanotechnology]({filename}/posts/nanotechnolog-1.md)
operates on an even smaller scale than micro-electronics, but its energy
requirements are comparable. Carbon nanofiber production, which is based
on many of the same techniques used by semiconductor manufacturing,
requires 760 to 3,000 MJ of electricity per kilogram of material, while
carbon nanotubes and single-walled nanotubes (SWNTs) manufacturing
requires a hefty 20,000 to 50,000 MJ per kilogram. The manufacture of
nanotubes is thus as energy-intensive as the manufacture of microchips
(36,000 MJ). Many of the large-scale applications proposed for nanotubes
will simply not be possible because of energy requirements.

## Recycling is no solution

Encouraging recycling is often proposed as a way to lower the embodied
energy of products. Unfortunately, this does not work for
micro-electronics (or nanomaterials). In the case of conventional
manufacturing methods, the energy requirements of the manufacturing
process (1 to 10 MJ per kilogram) are small compared to the energy
required to produce the materials themselves.

For instance, producing 1 kilogram of plastic out of crude oil requires
62 to 108 MJ of energy, while a typical mix of virgin and recycled
aluminum requires 219 MJ. To make a fair comparison, you have to
multiply the energy requirement of the manufacturing process by three (1
megajoule of electricity requires 3 megajoules of energy) but even then
(with 3 to 30 MJ/kg) conventional manufacturing processes appear to be
quite benign compared to materials extraction and primary processing (in
the order of 100 MJ/kg - [see
table](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/what-is-the-embodied-energy-of-materials.html)).

> Recycling is not a solution if all your energy use is concentrated in
the manufacturing process itself.

In the case of semiconductor manufacturing, this relation is reversed.
While it takes 230 to 235 MJ of energy to produce 1 kilogram of silicon
(already quite high compared to many other materials), chemical vapour
deposition (an important step in the semiconductor manufacturing
process) requires about 1,000 MJ of electricity and thus 3,000 MJ of
energy per kilogram.

That is 10 times more than the energy consumption of material extraction
and primary processing. In the case of conventional manufacturing
techniques, the use of recycled material is an effective way to lower
overall energy use during manufacture. In the case of semiconductors, it
is not. Recycling is not a solution for energy consumption if all your
energy use is concentrated in the process itself.

![image](/images/circuit-board-3.jpg)

This does not mean that the manufacture of microchips does not require
materials. In fact, producing microchips and nanomaterials is also more intensive than the manufacture of conventional products, by the same orders of magnitude. However, this concerns auxiliary materials which are not incorporated into the product.

For example, the embodied energy of the input cleaning gases in the CVD
process (not included in the figures above) is more than 4 orders of
magnitude greater than that of the product output. Furthermore, these
gases have to be treated to reduce their reactivity and possible
attendant pollution. Gutowski writes: "If this is done using point of
use combustion with methane, the embodied energy of the methane alone
can exceed the electricity input."

## The benefits of digital technology

Microchips also have positive effects on the environment, by making
other activities and processes more efficient. This is the subject of a
publication by the Climate Group, an initiative of more than [50 of the
world's largest
companies](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Climate_Group#Members). The
report ("[Smart 2020 - enabling the low carbon economy in the
information age](http://www.smart2020.org/)") confirms the findings of
other studies regarding the electricity use of electronic equipment, but
also calculates the benefits.

According to Smart 2020, the emissions from Information and
Communications Technology (including the energy use of data centres,
which the IEA report does not include) will rise from 0.5 Gt
CO2-equivalents in 2002 to 1.4 GtCO2-equivalents in 2020, assuming that
the sector will continue to make the "impressive advances in energy
efficiency that it has done previously". By enabling energy efficiencies
in other sectors, however, ICT could deliver carbon savings 5 times
larger: 7.8 Gt CO2-equivalents in 2020.

> Addressing technological obsolescence would be the most powerful
approach to lower the ecological footprint of digital technology

These benefits are smart grids (2.03 Gt), smart buildings (1.86 Gt),
smart motor systems (970 Mt), dematerialisation and substitution (by
replacing high carbon physical products and activities such as books and
meetings - with virtual low carbon equivalents such as electronic
commerce, electronic government, videoconferencing, 500 Mt) and smart
logistics (225 Mt). One of the first tasks of ICT will be to monitor
energy consumption and emissions across the economy in real time,
providing the data needed to optimise for energy efficiency.

The report concludes: "The scale of emission reductions that could be
enabled by the smart integration of ICT into new ways of operating
living, working, learning and travelling, makes the sector a key player
in the fight against climate change, despite its own growing footprint."

![image](/images/circuit-board-cityscape.jpg)

But even if we assume that all these savings will materialise (the
report acknowledges that this will not be an easy task), this conclusion
does not take into account the energy needed to manufacture all this
equipment. If we assume the share of manufacture to be 80 percent of
total energy consumption by ICT (following the only life cycle analysis
of a computer we have), then the 1.4 Gt in 2020 in reality should be 7
Gt - almost as much as the 7.8 Gt that will be saved by ICT. No
environmental benefit would appear and the energy savings realised by
digital technology would merely absorb its own growing footprint.

## Digital technology is a product of cheap energy

The research of Timothy Gutowski shows that the historical trend is
toward more and more energy intensive processes. At the same time,
energy resources are declining.

Gutowski writes:

"This phenomenon has been enabled by stable and declining material and
energy prices over this period. The seemingly extravagant use of
materials and energy resources by many newer manufacturing processes is
alarming and needs to be addressed alongside claims of improved
sustainability from products manufactured by these means."

Production techniques for semiconductors and nanomaterials can and will
become more efficient, by lowering the energy requirements of the
equipment or by raising the operating process rate. For instance, the
"[International Technology Roadmap for
Semiconductors](http://www.itrs.net/Links/2007ITRS/Home2007.htm)"
(ITRS), an initiative of the largest chip manufacturers worldwide, [aims
to lower energy
consumption](http://www.itrs.net/Links/2007ITRS/2007_Chapters/2007_ESH.pdf)
(pdf) per square centimetre of microchip from 1.9 kWh today to 1.6 kWh
in 2012, 1.35 kWh in 2015, 1.20 kWh in 2018 and 1.10 kWh in 2022.

![image](/images/circuit-board-city-scape-4.jpg)

But as these figures show, improving efficiency has its limits. The
gains will become smaller over time, and improving efficiency alone will
never bridge the gap with conventional manufacturing techniques.
Power-hungry production methods are inherent to digital technology as we
know it.

The ITRS-report warns that:

"Limitations on sources of energy could potentially limit the industry's ability to expand existing facilities or build new ones".

Gutowski writes:

"It should be pointed out that there is also a need for completely rethinking each of these processes and exploring alternative, and probably non-vapour-phase processes".

## Technological obsolescence

The ecological footprint of digital technology described above is far
from complete. This article focuses exclusively on energy use and does
not take into account the toxicity of manufacturing processes and the
use of water resources, both of which are also several orders of
magnitude higher in the case of both
[semiconductors](http://www.etoxics.org/site/PageServer?pagename=svtc_publications)
and
[nanomaterials]({filename}/posts/nanotechnolog-1.md).
To give an idea: most water used in semiconductor manufacturing is
ultrapure water (UPW), which requires large additional quantities of
chemicals. For many of these issues, the industry recognizes that there
are no solutions (see the
[same](http://www.itrs.net/Links/2007ITRS/2007_Chapters/2007_ESH.pdf)
ITRS-report, pdf). There are also the problems of
[waste](http://www.ban.org/ban_news/2008/images/080415_beware_free_electronic_waste_collection_events_300dpi.jpg)
&
[war](http://yglesias.thinkprogress.org/archives/2009/06/the-congo-chip.php).

Last, but not least: the energy-intensive nature of digital technology
is not due only to energy-intensive manufacturing processes. Equally as
important is the extremely short lifecycle of most gadgets. If digital
products would last a lifetime (or at least a decade), embodied energy
would not be such an issue. Most computers and other electronic devices
are replaced only after a couple of years, while they are still
perfectly workable devices. Addressing technological obsolescence would
be the most powerful approach to lower the ecological footprint of
digital technology.

© Kris De Decker (edited by Vincent Grosjean). Artwork by [Grace
Grothaus](http://www.gracegrothaus.com/) (the works are for sale). More
information on [manufacturing
methods](http://web.mit.edu/ebm/www/publications.htm).

## Related Articles:

-   [How sustainable is digital
    fabrication?]({filename}/posts/how-sustainable-is-digital-fabrication.md)
-   [How sustainable is PV solar
    power?]({filename}/posts/how-sustainable-is-pv-solar-power.md)
-   [The bright future of solar powered
    factories]({filename}/posts/solar-powered-factories.md):
    we need a renewable source of heat energy
-   [Mechanical calculators: computing without
    electricity](http://http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2008/05/computers-antiq.html)
-   [The digital
    oubliette]({filename}/posts/the-digital-d-1.md)
-   [Gaming
    unplugged]({filename}/posts/gaming-unplugge.md)
-   [Bike powered electricity generators are not
    sustainable]({filename}/posts/bike-powered-electricity-generators.md)
