Title: Who killed the electric grid? Fast-charging electric cars
Date: 2009-03-10 15:10
Author: Kris De Decker
Category: High-tech Problems
Tags: Batteries, electric cars, electric grid, meltdown
Slug: fast-charging-electric-cars-off-peak-grid
Status: published


Charging electric cars with off-peak power is a fantasy.

Fast recharging times generate lots of excitement, but what seems to be
forgotten is that they can lead to a fabulous amount of peak demand.

If you charge an electric car with a battery capacity of 25 kWh during 8
hours, it needs a power output of 3,125 watts. If you charge the same
car in just 10 minutes, it needs a power output of 155,000 watts.

Motor art courtesy of
[Lockwasher](http://www.flickr.com/photos/lockwasher/). All rights
reserved.
How many extra power plants do we need to build if we introduce electric
cars on a large scale? According to ecotech advocates, that matter is
solved: (almost) none. Electric vehicles can be charged at night. Many
power plants have a surplus of energy during the night ("off-peak
production capacity") because demand is low and generators keep
spinning. Therefore, if we all start driving electric cars, oil
consumption will plummet to zero and electricity production will remain
the same.

In December 2006, [a
study](http://newswire.ascribe.org/cgi-bin/behold.pl?ascribeid=20061211.105149&time=11%2005%20PST&year=2006&public=0)
at the US Pacific Northwest National Laboratory found that off-peak
electricity production and transmission capacity could fuel 84 percent
of the country's 220 million cars, if they would be converted to plug-in
hybrids. In June 2007, [another
study](http://www1.eere.energy.gov/vehiclesandfuels/avta/pdfs/phev/pratt_phev_workshop.pdf)
from the US government concluded that 73 percent of the existing US
light-duty vehicle fleet (cars, SUV's, pickup trucks, vans) could be
powered with available off-peak electric capacity if transformed to
plug-in hybrids. In March 2008, [a
study](http://www.ornl.gov/info/press_releases/get_press_release.cfm?ReleaseNumber=mr20080312-02)
from Oak Ridge National Laboratory said that if 25 percent of the US
fleet would be replaced by plug-in hybrids, only zero to eight new large
power plants would have to be built if all these cars plugged in after
10 pm.


Plug-in hybrids versus electric

The first difficulty is that these studies talk about plug-in hybrids,
not electric cars, which does not stop the media from presenting this
research with headlines like "[US power grid can fuel 180 million
electric
cars](http://www.treehugger.com/files/2006/12/180_million_plu.php)" or
"[Electric cars will not need new electric power
plants](http://www.futurepundit.com/archives/005067.html)".

Plug-in hybrids have (or will have, because they are not on the market
yet) smaller batteries than fully electric cars: a battery capacity of 5
to 25 kWh, compared to 10 to 50 kWh for a fully electric car
([source](http://www.ocean.udel.edu/cms/wkempton/kempton-v2g-pdffiles/PDF%20format/CocconiGage-V2G-June05.pdf)).
Plug-in hybrids have both an electric motor and a gasoline engine (which
kicks in at distances longer than 40 or 50 miles).

Charging at night?

Electric cars, however, do not have the backup of a gasoline engine and
an infrastructure of petrol stations for longer distances. If we can
only charge them at night, the range of our vehicles would be limited to
[100 miles
(160km)]({filename}/posts/the-status-quo-of-electric-cars-better-batteries-same-range.md)
per day, or only half of that when the cars are driven at high speed.
There are some electric cars that have better mileage: 220 miles for the
[Tesla Roadster](http://www.teslamotors.com/) and 150 for the [Mini
E](http://www.miniusa.com/#/learn/minimalism/MINIE-m) - but both have no
back seat since that space is taken by the larger battery.

The standard answer to this drawback is that the average commute in the
US is [only 33
miles](http://www.upi.com/Science_News/2008/07/14/Off-peak_electricity_could_power_hybrids/UPI-76901216074409/),
so in most cases the limited mileage of electric cars will be
sufficient.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div>

Manufacturers of electric cars and batteries are pushing faster
recharging times

</div>

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Averages are theoretical data: some of us will have to drive only 10
miles per day, others 120 miles. And at least now and then, almost
everyone will want to drive longer distances, but that would be
completely impossible in this scenario.

Moreover, many people do not have the possibility to charge their
vehicles at home - not everybody has a garage. This means that we need
an infrastructure of outlets along the curbs of cities and towns if we
want everybody to charge at night. Charging electric cars with off-peak
electricity might keep the need for new power plants limited, but it is
far from practical.

spots

Therefore, it is an illusion to think that *all* electric cars will be
charged at night. A substantial amount of them maybe, but not all. No
matter how small the amount of cars that needs charging during the day,
it means that we need an intricate infrastructure of charging spots
throughout cities and towns.

Companies and governments are already working on that. "[Better
Place](http://www.betterplace.com/)", which announced the building of a
charging infrastructure in Israel, Denmark, Portugal and California, is
the best known, but [there](http://www.coulombtech.com/index.php)
[are](http://news.cnet.com/8301-11128_3-10034960-54.html)
[more](http://www.newride.org.uk/news.php).

"Better Place" plans charging spots in parking garages, retail spaces
and on street curbs. About 10,000 of them will be installed in 2009
across Israel, and that will increase to 100,000 by 2010, according to
[Reuters](http://www.reuters.com/article/rbssConsumerGoodsAndRetailNews/idUSL83052420081208).
These spots will be the size of a parking meter and will deliver 3,300
watts (for 1 car) and 6,600 watts (for 2 cars).

This compares to the energy output of 10 plasma televisions (of [340
watts each](http://reviews.cnet.com/4520-6475_7-6400401-2.html)) to
charge one electric car. Adding this load at night might not be a
problem, but this becomes a very different story during the day. 1,000
power plants

The study from Oak Ridge National Laboratory also calculated what would
happen if all plug-in vehicles would be charged at 5 pm instead of after
10 pm. In this worst-case scenario, the US would need to build 160
"large" power plants (and the related distribution infrastructure, of
course). Note: this concerns plug-in hybrids, not fully electric cars,
and this concerns a penetration of only 25 percent, not 100 percent.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div>

Electric motors are more efficient than gasoline engines, but the
problem is not total energy consumption, it is peak load

</div>

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


A complete conversion to plug-in hybrids would thus require 640 extra
large power plants. The researchers do not specify what they consider to
be a "large" power plant, but this must be around 1,000 megawatts, which
boils down to the need for another 640 GW of power plants. That is
almost a 65 percent increase of the [existing US electricity generation
capacity](http://www.eia.doe.gov/cneaf/electricity/epa/epat2p2.html).

Fast recharging time

This is the worst case scenario considered by the researchers, where all
drivers plug in their cars at the same time and at the worst possible
moment of the day. That will never happen.

Yet, there is another scenario that is much worse and is not considered
by the researchers: a fleet of fast-recharging fully electric cars.

A vehicle that needs 6 to 12 hours of charging to drive just 1 or 2
hours will never appeal to the larger part of the public. The automobile
stands for freedom of movement, so electric cars will never catch on
unless they have at least a similar recharging time to that of a
gasoline car (one of the reasons why they disappeared [one hundred years
ago]({filename}/posts/bumper-cars-o-1.md)).

Manufacturers of electric cars and batteries know that, and that is why
most of them are [pushing faster recharging
times](http://www.greentechmedia.com/articles/electric-car-firms-push-alternative-to-project-better-places-idea-892.html).
Combined with an elaborate infrastructure of charging spots, this would
largely overcome the problem of limited autonomy. We would still need to
recharge more often than with a gasoline car, but at least it would be
possible to drive further than 100 miles from home, and to leave anytime
you want.

150,000 watts

Several manufacturers and researchers have already announced recharging
times [of](http://www.iht.com/articles/2008/11/27/business/rbogel.php)
[30](http://www.treehugger.com/files/2008/03/mitsubishi-i-miev-electric-car-new-york-auto-show.php)
[minutes](http://www.autobloggreen.com/2009/03/04/nissan-plans-ev-network-where-americans-actually-stop/)
[or](http://europe.theoildrum.com/node/5104)
[less](http://earth2tech.com/2008/06/19/epyon-10-minute-electric-car-charging/),
which would bring refuelling time quite close to that of a gasoline car.
This is only possible through a high-voltage current outlet. Fast
recharging times generate lots of excitement, but what seems to be
forgotten here is that they come with a price - you have to pump in more
energy over a shorter time, which can lead to a fabulous amount of peak
power.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div>

You cannot solve this issue with better batteries - in fact, you can
only make it worse

</div>

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

If you charge an electric car with a battery capacity of 25 kWh during 8
hours, it needs a power output of 3,125 watts (3.1 kilowatts x 8 hours =
25 kWh). If you charge the same car in just 20 minutes, you need a power
output of 75,000 watts (75 kilowatts x 0.33 hours = 25 kWh).

This corresponds to the energy output of 220 plasma televisions of 340
watts each. This amount of energy is required over a shorter period, but
it has to be available. If you lower the recharging time to
[10](http://www.t3.com/news/electric-lightning-sports-car-charges-as-fast-you-can-fill-a-petrol-tank?=36232)
[minutes](http://earth2tech.com/2008/06/19/epyon-10-minute-electric-car-charging/),
the energy output will be 155,000 watts (155 kilowatts x 0.16 hours = 25
kWh). This equates to 450 plasma televisions.

It will be clear that fast recharging times, even if they are used only
by a relatively small amount of drivers, will only be possible with a
massive extension of our electricity generation capacity.

Meltdown

There are 220 million private cars in the US. If the complete fleet
would be plugged in at the same time it would need 34,000 gigawatts, or
34 times the existing electricity generation capacity of the US. This
will never happen, but it compares to "only" a 65 percent increase of
the power capacity in the slow-charging scenario above. A large fleet of
fast-charging cars will melt the grid.


Charging just 6,500 of these vehicles (0.003 %) simultaneously in 10
minutes will require an energy output comparable to that of one large
power plant.

If one in a thousand of these cars (220,000 vehicles or 0.1 %) is
charged simultaneously in 10 minutes they will need 34 gigawatts. And
one in a 100 cars charged simultaneously will require a total energy
output of 340 gigawatts. The question is not how many cars will be
charged together *on average* during the day, but how many of them will
be charged together at any possible moment of the day, month or year.

Better batteries?

The energy infrastructure has to be prepared for the highest possible
demand - for instance, when everybody wants to drive to a large sporting
event. Also, don't forget that someone who wants to make a trip of 500
miles will have to charge the battery 5 times. Because of their shorter
range, electric cars need to be refuelled much more often than gasoline
cars.

There is no way around this problem. You cannot solve it with better
technology - in fact, you can only make it worse. Better batteries with
higher capacities may lower the amount of stops at charging spots, but
they will raise the amount of peak power required for one charge.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div>

Electric cars are not refrigerators - but many calculations of their
energy requirements treat them as if they were

</div>

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The fundamental problem (and we have noted this before) is [that
electric cars are
wireless]({filename}/posts/bumper-cars-o-1.md).
Trains, trams (streetcars) and
[trolleybuses]({filename}/posts/trolleytrucks-trolleybuses-cargotrams.md)
do not have these problems, simply because they do not need a battery.
Their energy consumption is spread evenly over their operation time.

People keep saying that electric motors are more efficient than gasoline
engines, and that's definitely true, but the problem is not total energy
consumption, it is peak load. Electric cars are not refrigerators - but
many calculations of their energy requirements treat them as if they
were.


batteries

There is only one last way around the mileage problem of electric cars:
swappable batteries (another part of the infrastructure proposed by
"Better Place"). This would mean that the batteries could be charged at
night at refuelling stations, and thus provide instant off-peak power
during the day. There are two problems with this.

Firstly, we are not talking about a handy laptop battery here. The
battery packs of electric cars easily weigh 100 to 500 kilograms, which
means you will need a machine to get them out and back in again.
Moreover, the batteries are not always placed so that you can easily
swap them - in many electric cars they are underneath the floor, to
optimise weight distribution and centre of gravity.

Secondly, all batteries would have to be the same, and achieving such a
standard is both technically and commercially very unlikely. If it
doesn't work for laptops or mobile phones, then why should it work for
cars? "A Better Place" will make use of standardised vehicles, but the
day that we will all be willing to drive the same car, we would probably
also not mind leaving the car altogether and - finally - get on a bike,
a tram or a train.

© Kris De Decker / edited by [Matt Hill](http://codebones.com/) / Motor
art courtesy of
[Lockwasher](http://www.flickr.com/photos/lockwasher/sets/72157602020950948/)[.](http://www.lowtechmagazine.be/2009/03/elektrische-auto-snelle-oplaadtijden-elektriciteitsnetwerk.html)

And finally, another warning from the
[WorkSafeBC](http://www.worksafebc.com/default.asp) :



  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
   
   
   
   
 ------------------------------------------------------------------------

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Related articles:



-   [Electric
    velomobiles]({filename}/posts/electric-velomobiles.md):
    as fast and comfortable as automobiles, but 80 times more efficient
-   [Bumper cars on the
    highway]({filename}/posts/bumper-cars-o-1.md)
    : trolleycars?
-   [The status quo of electric
    cars]({filename}/posts/the-status-quo-of-electric-cars-better-batteries-same-range.md):
    better batteries, same range
-   [Overview of early electric
    automobiles](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/overview-of-early-electric-cars.html):
    pictures and specifications
-   [Trolleybuses and
    trolleytrucks]({filename}/posts/trolleytrucks-trolleybuses-cargotrams.md)
    : get wired (again)
-   [The
    velomobile]({filename}/posts/the-velomobile-high-tech-bike-or-low-tech-car.md):
    high-tech bike or low-tech car?
-   [Wood gas
    cars]({filename}/posts/wood-gas-cars.md) :
    firewood in the fuel tank
-   [The age of
    speed]({filename}/posts/speed-energy.md) :
    how to cut global fuel consumption by 75 percent, today
-   [Cars - out of the
    way]({filename}/posts/get-rid-of-cars-ride-a-bicycle.md)
    : imagine bicycles taking over the motorways
-   [Leave the algae
    alone]({filename}/posts/algae-fuel-biof.md)
    : the second generation of biofuels is set to make things even worse
-   [Cleantech from the
    1940s]({filename}/posts/citroen-2cv.md) :
    the Citroen 2CV
-   [Magic
    Motorways](http://www.notechmagazine.com/2009/05/magic-motorways.html)
    : GM propaganda
-   [Trolley canal
    boats]({filename}/posts/trolley-canal-boats.md)
-   [Bike powered electricity generators are not
    sustainable]({filename}/posts/bike-powered-electricity-generators.md)

