Title: How Sustainable is Digital Fabrication?
Date: 2014-03-25 16:24
Author: Kris De Decker
Category: High-tech Problems
Tags: 3D printing, CNC machining, CNC routers, digital fabrication, digital manufacturing, machine tools
Slug: how-sustainable-is-digital-fabrication
Status: published



Digital fabrication is praised as the future of manufacturing. Computer
Numerical Controlled (CNC) machine tools can convert a digital design
into an object with the click of a mouse, which means the production
process is completely automated. The use of digital machine tools has
spread rapidly in factories over the last two decades, and they have now
become cheap and user-friendly enough to bring them within reach of
workshops and makers.

While CNC machines have been embraced by many, including some
environmentalists who say the technology can be more sustainable, it's
important to consider the very high energy use of digital machine tools.
Compared to the earlier generation of human-controlled machine tools,
CNC machines use much more power, and the potential to improve their
energy efficiency is very limited. Choosing fewer automated technologies
is the key to sustainable manufacturing.

Picture: A state-of-the-art fibre laser cutting machine, combined with
an unmanned loading/unloading system for metal sheets.
[Ermaksan](http://www.ermaksan.com.tr/en-EN/Product/Laser-Technology/TOWER).


Manufacturing processes can be broadly divided into two groups: primary
and secondary. The former&mdash;such as forging and casting&mdash;provide
basic shape and size to the material. Secondary processes provide the
final shape and size with tighter control on dimension and surface
characteristics. This second group is performed by so called "machine
tools".

Machine tools form the basis of precision manufacturing. As such they
are indispensable for the production of nearly all modern technology, be
it cars, planes, household appliances, computers, solar panels, wind
turbines, or other machine tools. They are so fundamental to
manufacturing that the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization (UNIDO) defines "industrialisation" as the capacity to
produce machine tools. \[1\]

Machine tools are stationary operating machines that perform the
geometric shaping of workpieces. \[2\] They are mostly subtractive
technologies, dealing with any process in which material is removed
gradually from a workpiece. There is a great diversity in specialized
machine tools, but common examples are sawing and cutting machines,
drilling machines, grinding machines, turning machines (lathes) and
milling machines.

Machine tools can process different materials, but today most of them
are used for the shaping of metal parts. Milling machines have become
the most common metal shaping tools in the mechanical manufacturing
industry. Milling is a process of cutting away material by feeding a
workpiece past a rotating cutting tool. A milling machine operates like
a human sculptor. It can have grinding, cutting and polishing heads.



A milling machine at work. Most milling machines have three axes, with a
table that moves along the x-axis which sits on a saddle that moves
along the y-axis. The spindle that holds the cutting tool is housed on a
milling head on the z-axis. Picture: Wikipedia Commons.

Lathes or turning machines are similar to milling machines but they are
used to shape cylindrical workpieces. In a milling machine the workpiece
remains (relatively) stationary while material is removed by moving
tools heads. In a lathe, the workpiece is rotating while the tool head
remains (relatively) stationary.

How to Power a Machine Tool

Modern definitions of machine tools exclude any machine that is powered
by humans. However, the predecessors of most machine tools were hand- or
foot-powered. Woodworking hand tools with the same kinematic motions as
modern machines, such as the cord lathe and the bow drill, were
developed in ancient times. \[3\]



Reproduction of a foot-powered medieval lathe.
[Source](http://arovingiwillgo.wordpress.com/2012/07/17/abbey-medieval-festival-2012-part-4/).

More sophisticated, foot-driven wood lathes, which had many of the
essential features of modern turning machines, appeared in the middle
ages. \[4\] Lathes for metalworking, which were originally developed for
the production of helical threads, emerged in the 1700s. \[5\] The first
real milling machine for metalworking was built in the early 1800s,
although similar operations were performed on adapted lathes by
clockmakers at least one century earlier. \[5\]\[6\]\[3\]\[4\]

> Wind- and water-powered mills from pre-industrial times fit the modern
> definition of machine tools

Machine tools were also driven by animals, wind or water power. The
Romans already had water-powered sawmills for cutting marble, but most
automatic machines only appeared in the middle ages. The Europeans used
sawmills, boring mills, turning mills, grinding and sharpening mills,
polishing mills, and metal slitting and rolling mills that were powered
by water, wind or animals. \[7\] \[8\]



A Swedish water-powered metal cutting mill from the 18th century. Metal
cutting mills had pairs of revolving cylinders through which metal was
passed either to form sheets (rolling) or to be cut into strips or rods
(slitting)



A water-powered glass polishing machine. Source: [Encyclopedie
Diderot](http://portail.atilf.fr/cgi-bin/getobject_?p.139:227./var/artfla/encyclopedie/textdata/image/).

These industrial mills were stationary, complex machines using non-human
power sources, and thus fit the modern definition of machine tools.
However, from the 1850s onwards, machine tools were increasingly powered
by steam engines, and today almost all machine tools are powered by
electricity.

How to Operate a Machine Tool
-----------------------------

The evolution of machine tools continued throughout the twentieth
century, though most improvements were now made to the operation of the
process. During the first half of the century, all machine tools were
hand-operated. The cutting tool itself was powered by steam engines or
electricity, but workers shaped the workpiece and took care of all
auxiliary actions.

For example, in a milling machine, motors only ran the drill and
mechanized the x-axis bench movement. \[9\] All other movements were
initiated and controlled by the operator, one at a time, often by use of
hand wheels. \[10\]



A manually-operated milling machine, 1920

These so-called "manual" machine tools are still in use, but they're
becoming increasingly rare. In the early 1950s, the first automatic
machine tool was developed. Data was fed into the machine on punched
tape, which allowed the machine tool to work independently. These
"numerically controlled" (NC) machine tools became commercially
available in 1960. \[4\] Around 1980, tape control was replaced by
computer control, which led to the development of "computer numerically
controlled" (CNC) machine tools.

> Until the 1980s, most machine tools were controlled by humans. The
> tool itself was powered by electricity, but workers shaped the
> workpiece

CNC machine tools heralded the era of digital manufacturing. With CNC
machines, human input is limited to the creation of a digital design on
a computer, which is then automatically converted into a physical object
by the machine tool. To achieve this, the digital design is fed into
software that converts it into a set of symbolically coded instructions
arranged in a proper sequence. The computer of the CNC machine then
executes the program step by step by moving the machines slides and the
tool head accordingly. \[4\]\[11\]

Increasing Automation
---------------------

Most machine tools built after 1985 are CNC machines, but considering
the long life expectancy of machine tools means the switch to CNC
machines is still on-going. \[3\] For instance, in 1995, only 350,000 of
the 3.5 million metal-working machine tools in Europe were CNC machines.
In 2009, this number had increased to 750,000. \[12\] At the same time,
the unit value of CNC machine tools raised significantly from 1995 to
2009, indicating that the machines have become more complex. \[12\]



A computer numerically controlled (CNC) milling machine. Picture: [King
Joy H.K.](http://www.kingjoy-hk.com/shebei.asp?list=2)

The level of automation in a CNC machine can vary considerably. For
example, in a milling machine, apart from the positioning and powering
of the tool, auxiliary functions such as machine lubrication, tool
changes, chip handling, tool break detection, or the loading and
unloading of workpieces can all be set in automatic code, but they can
also be operated by hand. \[4\]\[11\] The trend, however, is a move
towards more automated auxiliary functions. \[13\]

Automation also makes it possible to design more complex machine tools.
There are now milling machines with four, five or more axes which also
support rotation around one or multiple axes, while 3-axis milling
machines can only cut away material horizontally and vertically.

Power Use Increases with Automation Level
-----------------------------------------

It's obvious that the switch from human- and water-powered tools to
fossil-fuel powered tools has made manufacturing less sustainable.
What's surprising, however, is that the switch from human-controlled
machine tools to computer-controlled machine tools has much larger
consequences for energy use. Automation is more energy-intensive than
mechanisation.

> A computer-controlled milling machine requires 2.5 to 60 times more
> power than a hand-controlled milling machine

A comparison of the maximum power requirements by three CNC milling
machines (from 1988, 1998 and 2000) and one hand-operated milling
machine (from 1985), all cutting a similar workpiece, revealed that the
digital machines require 2.5 to 67 \[sic\] times more power than the
manual machine. At full operation, the hand-operated machine tool used
2.8 kW, while the digital machines used 7 kW for the 1998 machine, 9.4
kW for the 1988 machine, and 188 kW for the 2000 machine. \[13\]\[9\]



Room-sized CNC machining centre.
[Breton](http://www.directindustry.com/prod/breton/5-axes-cnc-vertical-machining-centers-large-parts-14598-438329.html#product-item_437395).

The authors of this widely cited paper, Jeffrey Dahmus and Timothy
Gutowski, show that the large difference in power use between several
types of CNC milling machines is mainly due to different automation
levels. The 2000 machine, which operates in a car factory, is fully
automated, while the other two digital machines only have their basic
milling operations controlled by computers.

Load-Independent Power Use
--------------------------

The power use of a machine tool is distributed among various activities.
Constant start-up operations refer to the load-independent power use of
the machine tool. This power is required whenever the machine is turned
on, independent of whether or not a part is produced. Run-time
operations include the power required for positioning the workpiece and
loading the tools. Material removal operations refer to the actual power
involved in cutting. \[13\]



Energy analysis of four milling machines. Source: \[13\]. Click to
enlarge.

In the case of the most automated CNC milling machine, the power used
handling the workpiece and tools is less than 15% of the total power
required. The remaining 85% of the power used by the machine is
constant, even when no action takes place. \[13\] For the other
machines, this share is lower, but still significant. In absolute
figures, power use for constant start-up operations (= idling) is 166 kW
for the most automated milling machine, 1.3 kW to 3.4 kW for the less
automated milling machines, and 0.7 kW for the manual machine. \[13\]
\[14\]

> Up to 85% of the power used by a CNC machine is constant, even when no
> action takes place

In all four of the milling machines analysed by Dahmus and Gutowski, the
power required to actually cut the material is the same, assuming
operating parameters, materials properties, and tool characteristics
remain constant. \[13\] If the material removal rate would be the same
for each machine, milling a similar part on a manual machine would take
2 to 5 times less energy than on the least automated CNC machine tools,
and 240 times less energy than on the most automated CNC milling
machine.

Material Removal Rate
---------------------

Operating parameters are not the same, however. The material removal
rate is 3 to 13 times higher on the more automated machines. \[15\]
Because energy consumption equals power consumption multiplied by time,
in the end a CNC machine might use less energy than a manual milling
machine for the processing of a similar part.

Higher production rates also increase the power consumption at the tool
tip: from 2 kW for the manual machine, to 6 kW for the least automated
CNC machines and to 22 kW on the fully automated CNC machine. \[13\]
Higher production rates require stiff mechanical systems with the
capability to absorb arising inertia forces. As a consequence, the
masses of the machine structure, such as moving machine components, have
to be increased. This, in turn, require motors with high torque output
which are able to increase the forces needed during acceleration and
deceleration. \[16\]



Building-sized CNC milling machine. [Pietro
Carnaghi](http://www.directindustry.com/prod/pietro-carnaghi/5-axes-vertical-spindle-mobile-gantry-milling-machines-20660-47858.html).

On the other hand, because of a higher production rate, the high power
required for maintaining the CNC machine tools in a "ready" position can
be divided over a larger amount of parts. If you calculate the energy
used per unit of material removed, then the two less automated CNC
milling machines have a similar efficiency as the manual machine.
Assuming 1,000 work hours (30% of machine time positioning, 70% of
machine time cutting, and 0% idling), the human controlled machine
requires 6.2 kJ of energy to remove one cubic centimetre of material,
while the CNC milling machines require 4.8 to 7.1 kJ of energy. \[13\]

The fully automated milling machine, on the other hand, requires 39 kJ
per cubic centimetre of material removed, and is thus at least five
times less efficient per unit of material removed than the other
machines. \[13\]

Idling Time
-----------

An idling time of 0%, as we have assumed, is not realistic. In fact,
machine tools are rarely switched off between jobs and often remain
idling even at night, notes the German Fraunhofer Research Institute in
a 2012 study on sustainable manufacturing methods:

"There are various reasons why machine tools are frequently not shut off
at the end of a shift: One reason is to ensure thermal steady-state
conditions with a specific thermal strain, which is very important for
high accuracy of metal working machine tools, complex products and work
pieces. Overnight shut off or other periods of non-operation of machine
tools could result in processing temperatures to fall below desirable
levels, and thus having an adverse impact on the process and
manufacturing precision." \[17\]

When idling times increase, the energy use per cubic centimetre of
material removed increases significantly for digital machines, and much
less so for the hand-operated machine tool. If the two least automated
milling machines are kept idling all night, their specific energy
consumption would be much larger than that of the manual machine. This
would be even more so for the fully automated CNC machine, but Dahmus
and Gutowski note that these types of machines are often operated 24
hours per day and are idling less than 10% of their total life time.
\[13\]



80 kW CNC machining centre. [SHW
Werkzeugmaschinen](http://www.shw-wm.de/web/en/index.php).

Easily Solved?

In theory, there are many opportunities to improve the energy efficiency
of machine tools. For instance, engineers have designed alternatives to
coolant and lubrication systems, as well as kinetic energy recovery
systems. Further energy savings could be achieved by using lightweight
but strong materials, more efficient motors, more flexible machines, a
transition to power saving modes during stand-by periods, and so on.
\[18\]\[16\]\[19\]

However, the energy savings potential of these technologies seems rather
small. According to the Fraunhofer Institute, "there is no single option
with a large environmental improvement potential, and moderate savings
of 3-5% can be realised only with the implementation of several
individual options". For metal working machine tools, they estimate the
savings potential at 4%." \[20\]

> The incentives to improve the energy efficiency of machine tools are
> rather small, especially when energy saving measures hamper
> productivity

The problem is not just technological. The main obstacle is the extent
to which machine tool builders are willing to integrate energy-saving
technologies. Few manufacturers have used the best available
technologies. \[2\] Kinetic recovery systems, for instance, although
considered a big trend in the 1990s, were never broadly introduced into
the market. \[16\]

Sustainability versus Productivity

Incentives to improve the energy efficiency of machine tools are rather
small. Firstly, energy saving measures may impede productivity. For
instance, when taking into account the large power use during idling,
it's obvious that a power saving mode during stand-by periods could be
as useful on a machine tool as it is on a laptop. However, the *European
Association of the Machine Tool Industries* notes that:

"Productivity is severely hampered, if too short transition periods from
any processing mode to a sleep/standby-mode of the machine tool or parts
thereof are made obligatory: warm up and bringing back the machine to
full operation state delays the processing". \[21\]

Secondly, depending on the automation level, energy costs are only 1 to
6% of total machining costs. \[22\]\[17\] A study investigating energy
and cost-efficiency in CNC machining concludes that "the energy prices
of today are not high enough to pose any particular need for making
radical energy savings for CNC machining". Instead, the researchers
advice that "significant cost savings can be achieved if the production
output is increased as a consequence from higher removal rates.... If
production output can be increased, cost and energy savings can follow".
\[22\]



Large CNC machining centre. [Bost Machine Tools
Company](http://www.bost.es/es/#__products).

Larger cost savings can be achieved by increasing the production rate
rather than by using more energy efficient machine tools, so there is
little to win by concentrating on energy use&mdash;especially when energy
saving measures are in conflict with higher production rates.

Increasing the Production Rate
------------------------------

Further increasing the production rate of digital machining tools will
save money, but energy savings are less certain. As we have seen, power
use increases as the material removal rate does. The more fundamental
problem, however, is that an increase of the production rate also
implies an increase in material use.

A machine that works ten times faster also produces ten times more parts
and needs as much more raw materials. And that's detrimental from an
energy-saving perspective, because material production completely
dominates industrial energy consumption. For example, the manufacture of
a one kilogram steel part takes approximately 3 MJ for milling and 27 MJ
for steel production. \[11\]

> Increasing the production rate of machine tools lowers the specific
> energy used per produced part. The problem is that it implies an
> increase in material production, which increases total energy demand.

Lowering the specific energy consumption of CNC milling machines by
increasing the production rate thus leads to an important increase in
total energy use. This effect would not exist if one CNC machine
replaced four manually operated milling machines and total production
would remain at the same level. But that's not the case. CNC machine
tools are used precisely because they can produce higher quantity of
components in a shorter time and at lower costs. \[13\]



Large CNC turning centre. [Bost Machine Tools
Company](http://www.bost.es/es/#__products).

For a given operation, the machining time was reduced from 100 minutes
at the beginning of the twentieth century to one minute using modern CNC
machine tools. \[23\] There is still considerable scope for higher
production rates: according to a forecast, the future upper limit for
the cutting speed of a milling machine, based on the progress in cutting
tool materials, will approach one Mach, or 340 metres per second. \[23\]

Non-Conventional Machining Technologies

The rise of CNC machine tools is not the only high-energy trend in
manufacturing technology. At least as important is the emergence of
so-called "non-conventional" machine tools. Conventional machining
processes (such as milling and turning) remove material by applying
forces on the material with a cutting tool that is harder than the
material. Such forces induce plastic deformation within the workpiece
leading to shear deformation and chip formation. \[24\]

Many non-conventional machine tools rely on thermal processes instead;
electrodischarge or spark erosion machining (an alternative to milling),
laser beam machining, plasma arc machining, and electron beam machining
(all alternatives to cutting). Other non-conventional machine tools rely
on mechanical processes that don't use shearing as their primary source
of energy, such as ultrasonic machining (an alternative to milling) and
waterjet machining (an alternative to cutting). For example, waterjet
machining uses mechanical energy, but material is removed by erosion.
\[25\] Yet other non-conventional machine tools are based on chemical or
electro-chemical processes. \[26\]



A water jet cuttter. [Maximator
Jet](http://www.directindustry.com/prod/maximator-jet-waterjet-cutting-systems/water-jet-cutting-machines-36351-348018.html).

Originally, non-conventional machine tools were developed specifically
for workpiece materials that are difficult or impossible to shape using
traditional processes. These can be stronger materials of high strength,
or materials with high abrasive wear. In the first case, conventional
machining is inadequate because it's time-consuming and leads to
unacceptable tool wear. In the second case, conventional machining falls
short because the tool bit can cause surface cracks and residual
stresses in brittle materials. \[26\]

Laser Cutters
-------------

However, some non-conventional machine tools have found extensive use in
machining of common materials, because they offer added benefits to
traditional machine tools. \[26\] This is especially true for the laser
cutter, which uses a highly concentrated energy beam. Contrary to
milling, a three-dimensional process, laser cutters operate in only two
dimensions. They have become popular for cutting common sheet metal, at
the expense of more traditional technologies such as punching, blanking,
and guillotining. \[11\] Metal cutting machines are the second most
important machine tools in the manufacturing industry, after milling
machines.

> Laser cutters have become popular for cutting common sheet metal at
> the expense of more traditional technologies such as punching,
> blanking, and guillotining

Compared to conventional machine tools, laser cutters offer a higher
degree of precision and quality of finish. They can create more complex
profiles and finer details. Cutting and drilling can be achieved with no
force applied to the workpiece, avoiding damage. There is only a small
heat-affected zone, which reduces the chances of warping the material (a
problem with machine tools based on thermal energy). \[26\] \[27\] \[4\]

Unfortunately, laser cutters have one big disadvantage: they need a lot
of power. Being CNC machines, they require substantial power for
computer control and auxiliary functions. Apart from that, they also
make use of a more energy-instensive cutting "tool" than the machines
they replace. A laser cutter works by melting or evaporating material,
which is energy-intensive compared to shearing or punching.



Laser cutting machine.
[Bystronic](http://www.directindustry.com/prod/bystronic-laser/automatic-laser-cutting-machines-15383-974575.html).

This means that laser cutters use even more power than CNC machines.
Research has shown that a CO2 laser cutter with a 4 kW laser beam output
requires 55 kW of power cutting steel plates at maximum output power,
while a modern CNC shearing machine (a "guillotine" cutter) with a
similar cutting force requires less than 16 kW of power at maximum
output. \[18\]\[28\]

Nobody has bothered to measure the power use of a hand-controlled
(electrically powered) shearing machine, but looking at power
requirements of similar machine tools, this must be less than 5 kW.
\[10\] Even more efficient is a hand-powered shearing machine&mdash;[still
for
sale](http://www.alibaba.com/product-detail/SF1-2X1300-manual-sheet-metal-shearing_1314002633.html?s=p)
-- which requires no external power at all. As with 3D milling machines,
we see an evolution in 2D metal cutting towards increasingly
power-intensive manufacturing processes, and the increase in power use
accelerates over time.

Punching Machines
-----------------

When used for cutting sheet metal, laser cutters are most often used for
making complex shapes instead of straight cuts. This makes them an
alternative to punching machines, rather than to shearing or
guillotining machines. Just like a laser cutter, a punching machine can
cut free forms in 2D sheet metal through the process of nibbling, but
compared to laser cutters they have lower resolution and produce parts
with a rougher finish.



A CNC turret punching machine is nibbling sheet metal.
[Euromac](http://www.directindustry.com/prod/euromac/cnc-turret-punching-machines-16272-419873.html).

Nibbling requires much less power than laser cutting. To my knowledge,
the power use of punching machines hasn't been researched, but the
maximum power requirements indicated by manufacturers are between 6 and
11 kW. \[29\] A CNC punching machine thus requires at least five to ten
times less power than a laser cutter.

I also found power requirements for several manually operated nibbling
machines in a 1980s catalogue, which are between 1.5 kW (without digital
readout) and 2.2 kW (with digital readout). \[30\] If we would produce a
similar part on each of these machines, using a manual machine could
thus be 25 to 35 times more efficient than using a laser cutter.

> A human-controlled punching machine is 25 to 35 times more efficient
> than a laser cutter when producing a standard part





Electrically powered, hand-controlled punching machine. [From a 1980s
Trumpf
catalogue](http://www.sterlingmachinery.com/db-files/trumpf%20curve%20cutting%20out%20and%20nibbling%20shears%20copy%20and%20coordinate%20nibbling%20machines%20brochure.pdf).

Working speed
-------------

Higher power consumption can result in lower energy use per part if the
production rate is high enough, but there seems to be no comparison of
the energy use of laser cutters and CNC punching or shearing machines
available. Figuring out the production rate of these machines is
complicated, because it depends on many factors: material properties,
material thickness, design complexity, positioning system, and so on.

Nevertheless, from the scattered data I could gather, it seems unlikely
that laser cutters are fast enough to compensate for their higher power
requirements for most metal cutting jobs. CNC shearing machines are
faster than laser cutters for cutting straight lines, and CNC punching
machines are faster than laser cutters for many common metal-cutting
jobs. The unique selling point of the laser cutter lies less in speed
and more in accuracy, product quality, and flexibility.



Combined punching (left) and laser (right) cutting machine. Source:
[Danobat
Group](http://www.directindustry.com/prod/danobatgroup/combined-punching-laser-cutting-machines-5654-418271.html).

A crucial advantage is that a laser cutter needs just one tool, no
matter how complex the design of the workpiece. On a CNC punching
machine you need to load the right selection of tools for each specific
design, and possibly introduce tool changes along the way. This means
that the more complicated the design is, the faster and more
advantageous a laser cutter becomes compared to a punching machine. This
is even higher in small production runs, because there is no need to set
up tools.

Laser cutters are thus especially suited for complex quality parts in
small batches. This market will grow because as laser cutters spread
they will raise the standards of production. Precisely because of the
availability of laser cutters, products will get more complex, more
accurate, more qualitative, and more flexible.

Fibre Laser Cutters

For laser cutters, energy costs account for about 25% of total
production costs. \[10\] This means that there is more impetus to
develop energy-efficient technology, and addressing the power use of the
laser source is most profitable. While the CO2-laser is the most
commonly used technology in sheet metal industry, the more efficient
fibre laser source technology is an emerging alternative. Measurements
indicate that a 2 kW fibre laser draws 17.6 kW at maximum laser output,
which compares to 33 kW for a 2.5 kW CO2-laser and 59 kW for a 4 kW
CO2-laser. \[18\]

The maximum power requirements of fibre lasers are thus about two to
three times lower than those of a CO2-laser. This comes close to the
maximum power use of a CNC shearing machine (16 kW), but it is still
double that of a CNC punching machine, and about 10 times higher than
the power output of a hand-controlled (electrically powered) nibbling
machine.



> Fibre laser cutters are more efficient than CO2-laser cutters, but
> their power consumption is still 10 times larger than that of a slower
> but equally powerful human-controlled nibbling machine

Furthermore, fibre laser cutters cannot replace CO2-laser cutters for
all applications, at least not yet. The technologies complement each
other. For sheet metal thicker than 4 to 6 mm, CO2 lasers are still the
best choice regarding energy efficiency, working speed and cutting
quality. \[10\]\[20\]\[18\] Fibre lasers cannot cut wood or acrylics,
but they can cut brass and copper. For CO2-lasers, it's the other way
around.

Manufacturing Becomes Increasingly Energy Intensive
---------------------------------------------------

By looking at two of the most important machining processes&mdash;metal
milling and cutting&mdash;it becomes clear that our manufacturing methods
are becoming more energy-intensive. This is remarkable, because there
are many reasons to believe that we should move in the opposite
direction. Our dependence on non-renewable energy sources has created
tough challenges, like climate change, peak oil, safekeeping nuclear
waste, environmental degradation, and geopolitical conflicts. If we plan
a switch to a manufacturing industry based on renewable energy, we would
be smart to evolve to less energy-intensive machine tools instead.

Automated machine tools can never become as energy efficient as their
hand-controlled counterparts. Replacing human operators requires energy.
A fully automated machine will always consume more energy than a
semi-automated machine. So, choosing fewer automated manufacturing
technologies should be at least part of the solution.



A manually operated turning machine. Picture: Wikipedia Commons.

> Choosing less automated manufacturing technologies should be a part of
> the solution

Energy use is not the only concern.
[CO2PE](http://www.co2pe.org/?Homepage), an initiative that aims to
coordinate international efforts to document, analyse and improve the
environmental footprint of manufacturing processes, notes that:

"The intensifying use of non-conventional processing techniques, such as
electro-chemical and laser based processes, results in the generation of
emissions that have hardly been investigated from an environmental
perspective. These undocumented and hard to control material flows are
likely to imply significant potential human health hazards." \[31\]

CO2PE and similar research efforts do not aim to promote fewer automated
machine tools. Instead, they aim to promote making automated machine
tools as efficient (and safe) as possible. This strategy will spur
economic growth, but won't prevent the increase of energy consumption in
manufacturing. While energy efficiency improvements will be realized,
Dahmus and Gutowski note that "efficiency improvements in auxiliary
equipment may in fact lead to increases in the sales of auxiliary
equipment." \[13\]



Manufacturing technology is a posterchild for the paradox of
energy-efficiency. \[32\] The more efficient digital machines become,
the more they replace older generations of machine tools and find new
applications, and the larger their influence in total energy use will
be. Likewise, improvements in energy-efficiency pave the way for ever
larger and more powerful machines, as machine tools keep growing in
size, speed and complexity. \[33\]

The Maker Revolution
--------------------

Some CNC machine tools are now available in desktop sizes, with prices
that bring them within reach of richer western customers. For example,
you can now find a desktop CNC milling machine for less than € 5,000,
and a desktop laser cutter for about € 12,000. Digital machine tools and
non-conventional machine tools also appear in [fab
labs](http://www.fabfoundation.org/fab-labs/),
[makerspaces](http://makerspace.com/makerspace-directory), and
[hackerspaces](http://hackerspaces.org/wiki/List_of_hackerspaces), where
they are accessible to members.

> The digital maker revolution may be just as unsustainable as the
> digital fabrication revolution in factories

There is quite some difference between desktop CNC machines and the CNC
machines used in industry. A desktop CNC milling machine can only mill
wood or aluminium, and a desktop laser cutter only cuts thin wood,
plastics or cardboard. However, some fab labs and makerspaces have been
introducing industry-scale machine tools lately, and the general
expectation is that the possibilities of desktop manufacturing tools
will improve quickly. Furthermore, there isn't a strict separation
between the digital revolution inside and outside factories. Consumers
can already send digital designs to "cloud manufacturers", which use
industrial-scale digital machine tools to produce whatever you can
design on your computer. \[34\]



A manually operated vertical milling machine. It has a control panel and
a digital readout, but the operator is in control of all movements.
Picture: [lathes.co.uk](http://www.lathes.co.uk/page21.html)

Some environmentalists have embraced digital machine tools. However,
this consumer-driven digital maker revolution is just as unsustainable
as the digital fabrication revolution in large factories. We've been
able to produce everything locally for decades using hand-controlled
machine tools. Digital tools only allow us to produce more and faster.
And this happens, just as in industry, at the expense of higher energy
consumption.

It's not only about the higher energy use of the machines. If consumers
can use fast manufacturing machines, total material production will
likely increase, similar to what is happening in factories. In his 2012
book *Makers: The New Industrial Revolution*, Chris Anderson writes
that:

"The digital transformation of making stuff is doing more than simply
making existing manufacturing more efficient. It's also extending
manufacturing to a hugely expanded population of producers&mdash;the
existing manufactures plus a lot of regular folk who are becoming
entrepreneurs. We will all just be a click away from getting factories
to work for us. What do you want to make today?" \[34\]

When billions of people are just a click away from getting factories to
work for them, whether in the cloud or on their desktops, this does not
bode well for sustainability. We'll create even more stuff, and each
product will cost much more energy than if produced with conventional
methods.

Kris De Decker (edited by [Deva Lee](http://www.theculturemuncher.com/))

Related articles:

-   [The monster footprint of digital
    technology]({filename}/posts/embodied-energy-of-digital-technology.md)
-   [How to make everything ourselves: open modular
    hardware]({filename}/posts/how-to-make-everything-ourselves-open-modular-hardware.md)
-   [Hand powered drilling tools and
    machines]({filename}/posts/hand-powered-drilling-tools-and-machines.md)
-   [The bright future of solar thermal powered
    factories]({filename}/posts/solar-powered-factories.md)
-   [Pedal powered factories: the forgotten future of the stationary
    bicycle]({filename}/posts/pedal-powered-farms-and-factories.md)
-   [The short history of early pedal powered
    machines]({filename}/posts/history-of-pedal-powered-machines.md)
-   [Wind powered factories: history and future of the industrial
    windmill]({filename}/posts/history-of-industrial-windmills.md)

Notes:

\[1\] [Making Do: Innovation in Kenya's Informal
Economy](http://issuu.com/steveddaniels/docs/makingdo), Steve Daniels,
2010.

\[2\] [Transition Towards Energy Efficient Machine
Tools](http://books.google.es/books?id=9MCCmpqTWEAC&pg=PR5&lpg=PR5&dq=transition+towards+energy+efficient+machine+tools+andr%C3%A9+zein&source=bl&ots=kjzsrc5xGl&sig=rZTIr_FyA5FQIpoeu6kbhahfPo0&hl=nl&sa=X&ei=T9QUU6LyNefy7AbD6YDgDw&ved=0CD4Q6AEwAg#v=onepage&q=transition%20towards%20energy%20efficient%20machine%20tools%20andr%C3%A9%20zein&f=false),
André Zein, 2012

\[3\] [Metal Cutting Theory and
Practice](http://books.google.es/books?id=PvK72Ymaj10C&pg=PA371&lpg=PA371&dq=%22metal+cutting+theory+and+practice%22&source=bl&ots=AkN6oB462u&sig=VZOFBBwS1Ib7diOtt3YTKZzZY5Q&hl=nl&sa=X&ei=ke8UU_uIDa3g7QbavYCQDA&ved=0CF8Q6AEwBQ#v=onepage&q=%22metal%20cutting%20theory%20and%20practice%22&f=false),
David A. Stephenson, John S. Agapiou, 2005

\[4\] [Fundamentals of Metal Cutting and Machine
Tools](http://books.google.es/books?id=r8paflRca90C&pg=PA1&hl=nl&source=gbs_toc_r&cad=4#v=onepage&q&f=false),
B.L. Juneja and G.S. Sekhon Nitin Seth, 2003

\[5\] [Histoire générale des techniques - tome 2: les premières étapes
du
machinisme](http://www.abebooks.co.uk/search/sortby/3/an/Daumas+/tn/+Histoire+Generale+Des+Technique),
Maurice Dumas, 1964

\[6\] [Histoire générale des techniques - tome 3: l'expansion du
machinisme](http://www.amazon.fr/Histoire-g%C3%A9n%C3%A9rale-techniques-LExpansion-machinisme/dp/2130478638/ref=sr_1_5/279-3814870-6218056?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1395755425&sr=1-5&keywords=Histoire+des+techniques),
Maurice Daumas, 1964

\[7\] [Wind, Water, Work: Ancient And Medieval Milling Technology
(Technology and Change in
History)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/9004146490?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=9004146490)![](http://www.assoc-amazon.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=as2&o=1&a=9004146490){.uuhwewivwknfowzjrmyi
.pgllzfdsnlnshtahugth width="1" height="1"}, Adam Lucas, 2005

\[8\] [Stronger than a Hundred Men: A History of the Vertical Water
Wheel (Johns Hopkins Studies in the History of
Technology)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0801872480?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0801872480)![](http://www.assoc-amazon.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=as2&o=1&a=0801872480){width="1"
height="1"}, Terry S. Reynolds, 1983.

\[9\] [A Power Assessment of Machining
Tools](http://web.mit.edu/baniszew/Public/Classes/Thesis/1.2.pdf) (PDF),
David N Kordonowy, May 2002

\[10\] [TASK 4 Report - Assessment of Base Case, Energy-Using Product
Group Analysis - Lot 5 Machine tools and related
machinery](http://www.ecomachinetools.eu/typo/reports.html)", Fraunhofer
Institute for Reliability and MicroIntegration, IZM Department
Environmental and Reliability Engineering, August 2012.

\[11\] [Energy and Eco-Efficiency of Machine Tools, Processes and
Handling
Equipment](http://www.google.es/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&ved=0CDAQFjAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.eneplan.eu%2Fdeliverables%2Fwp1-specifications-requirements-business-case%2Fd1.1%2Fd1.1-energy-eco-efficiency-of-machine-tools-processes-handling-equipment%2Fat_download%2Ffile&ei=p-QUU7_0L8TR7AbxkID4CA&usg=AFQjCNH-TqYkOCDjLXzGAqyMl3j_qhda-Q&sig2=gcnQ5ycmImtCAyu55szdUA&bvm=bv.61965928,d.ZGU)
(PDF), FP7 Project, ENEPLAN Consortium, May 2012

\[12\] [TASK 2 Report - Economic and Market Analysis, Energy-Using
Product Group Analysis - Lot 5 Machine tools and related
machinery](http://www.ecomachinetools.eu/typo/reports.html), Fraunhofer
Institute for Reliability and MicroIntegration, IZM Department
Environmental and Reliability Engineering, August 2012.

\[13\] [An Environmental Analysis of
Machining](http://web.mit.edu/ebm/www/Publications/ASME2004-62600.pdf)
(PDF), Jeffrey B. Dahmus and Timothy G. Gutowski, Proceedings of 2004
ASME International Mechanical Engineering Congress, 2004

\[14\] Other studies have confirmed these results for other types of CNC
machine tools. For instance, a comparison of the specific energy
consumption of six different grinding processes revealed that the energy
required for the grinding process itself is just 10-20% of the energy of
the entire grinding machine tool. \[see 18, page 37\]

\[15\] While the manual milling machine cuts steel at a rate of 0.35
cubic centimetres per second, the CNC milling machines from 1988 and
1998 achieve a material removal rate of 1.2 cubic centimetres per
second, and the machine from 2000 obtains a rate of 4.7 cubic
centimetres per second. Cited from note 13.

\[16\] [TASK 5 Report - Technical Analysis BAT and BNAT, Energy-Using
Product Group Analysis - Lot 5 Machine tools and related
machinery](http://www.ecomachinetools.eu/typo/reports.html), Fraunhofer
Institute for Reliability and MicroIntegration, IZM Department
Environmental and Reliability Engineering, August 2012.

\[17\] [TASK 3 Report - User Requirements, Energy-Using Product Group
Analysis - Lot 5 Machine tools and related
machinery](http://www.ecomachinetools.eu/typo/reports.html), Fraunhofer
Institute for Reliability and MicroIntegration, IZM Department
Environmental and Reliability Engineering, August 2012.

\[18\] [Energy and Resource Efficient Manufacturing&mdash;Unit process
analysis and
optimisation](https://lirias.kuleuven.be/bitstream/123456789/425178/1/PhD_Thesis_KellensKarel_Energy+and+Resource+Efficient+Manufacturing.pdf)
(PDF), Karel Kellens, December 2013

\[19\] [DEMAT&mdash;Dematerialized Manufacturing
Systems](http://www.dematproject.eu/). Website.

\[20\] [TASK 6 Report - Improvement Potential, Energy-Using Product
Group Analysis - Lot 5 Machine tools and related
machinery](http://www.ecomachinetools.eu/typo/reports.html), Fraunhofer
Institute for Reliability and MicroIntegration, IZM Department
Environmental and Reliability Engineering, August 2012.

\[21\] [The Ecodesign Directive: Energy Efficiency Targets for Machine
Tools](http://www.ceees.org/downloads/Energy%20efficient%20targets%20for%20machine%20tools.pdf)
(PDF), Magdalena Garczynska, The European Association of the Machine
Tool Industries, date unknown.

\[22\] [Energy and Cost Efficiency in CNC
Machining](http://www.diva-portal.org/smash/get/diva2:287555/FULLTEXT01.pdf)
(PDF), S. Anderberg, S. Kara, The 7th CIRP Conference on Sustainable
Manufacturing, 2012

\[23\] [Advanced Machining Processes of Metallic
Materials](http://books.google.es/books?id=j-_QA3u1D5EC&pg=PR11&lpg=PR11&dq=non-conventional+metal+cutting+technology&source=bl&ots=isljBjdfTO&sig=CHhQZGWZH5FCMCPghGeDFhFWVfU&hl=nl&sa=X&ei=IXgCU4PuFaSr0QXOtoGwCA&ved=0CHUQ6AEwCQ#v=onepage&q=non-conventional%20metal%20cutting%20technology&f=false),
Wit Grzesik, 2008

\[24\] <http://es.scribd.com/doc/11621837/35-Non-Conventional-Machining>

\[25\] <http://www.engineershandbook.com/>

\[26\] [Fundamentals of metal machining and machine tools, second
edition](http://books.google.es/books?id=sMmqNKclBV8C&pg=PA468&lpg=PA468&dq=non-conventional+machining&source=bl&ots=yU_VntrMc3&sig=kFUJLz3jyVCJwrQ6NHLTkA4Kc4U&hl=nl&sa=X&ei=jYMSU4uqOOnM0AWb5YCQAw&ved=0CDIQ6AEwATgK#v=onepage&q=non-conventional%20machining&f=false),
Geoffrey Boothroyd, 1989.

\[27\] [Advantages and disadvantages of laser
cutting](http://www.buzzle.com/articles/advantages-and-disadvantages-of-laser-cutting.html),
Buzzle, 2012

\[28\] Karel Kellens, [CO2PE](http://www.co2pe.org/), personal
communication

\[29\] <http://www.directindustry.com/>

\[30\] [TRUMPF
catalogue](http://www.sterlingmachinery.com/db-files/trumpf%20curve%20cutting%20out%20and%20nibbling%20shears%20copy%20and%20coordinate%20nibbling%20machines%20brochure.pdf).

\[31\] <http://www.co2pe.org/>

\[32\] [Technological innovation, energy efficient design and the
rebound
effect](http://oro.open.ac.uk/7182/1/Herring&RoyTechnovationNov06v2.pdf)
(PDF), Horace Herring and Robin Roy, Technovation 27 (4), 2007

\[33\] This is very similar to what has happened with cars, where more
efficient engines brought us more efficient small cars but also very
power hungry SUV's, which would never have gotten so popular were it not
for energy-efficient engines. Contrary to cars, which cannot get
infinitely larger and faster because they have to adapt to road sizes
and traffic laws, there is no upper limit when it comes to building
larger and faster machine tools. Maybe all we need is a maximum speed
limit for machine tools.

\[34\] [Makers: The New Industrial
Revolution](http://books.google.be/books/about/Makers.html?id=_xd69urR7agC&redir_esc=y),
Chris Anderson, 2012.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
