Title: Viva Las Vegas: LEDs and the energy efficiency paradox
Date: 2008-10-14 22:05
Author: Kris De Decker
Category: High-tech Problems
Slug: led-light-cfl-b
Status: published



The incandescent light bulb is abused by environmentalists – but the
alternative will only raise energy consumption. More and more, compact
fluorescent lamps are considered to be an interim technology, awaiting
the arrival of Light Emitting Diodes (LEDs) and Organic Light Emitting
Diodes (OLEDs).

At the moment, LED technology is no competition for the incandescent
light bulb. However, it can be considered a worthy improvement of
another technology: neon lights. Whether or not white LEDs will finally
arrive, the success of coloured LEDs is a fact. Though some of them are
definitely useful, they all introduce lighting in places and situations
where there was no lighting before.

  
Picture : [Rune Guneriussen](http://www.runeguneriussen.no/index.html)



The invention of the [incandescent light
bulb](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Incandescent_light_bulb) in the 19th
century was one of the most important technological breakthroughs of the
Industrial Revolution. Until that time, people used torches, candles,
oil lanterns, and kerosene and gas lamps to light up the interior of
their houses. Compared to a light bulb, these methods were dangerous,
clumsy and unhealthy. The incandescent light bulb, perfected and brought
to commercial success by Thomas Edison, solved all those problems in one
go.

Today, the Edison bulb is considered to be evil. The reason: an
incandescent light bulb only converts 10 percent of the electrical power
supplied into visible light. The rest is emitted as infrared light, in
other words: heat. Since lighting is responsible for 20 to 25 percent of
electricity consumption in a home, engineers try to design new
technologies that could save a large amount of energy. Up until now, no
one has succeeded.



Compact Fluorescent Lamps (CFLs)

Halogen lamps (fitted into many desktop armatures and in spotlights)
were introduced in 1959 and were then considered to be the future of
lighting, but it turned out they run too hot for many applications. Next
came the [compact fluorescent
lamps](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Compact_fluorescent_lamp) (CFLs),
invented (in their modern form) in 1973 and much hyped in recent years.
In the meantime it has become clear that they, too, have too many
drawbacks to become a worthy successor of the incandescent light bulb.

CFLs are more energy efficient and have longer life expectancies than
incandescent light bulbs, but the light they produce is not as pleasing
as a normal light bulb they do not reproduce the colours of various
objects faithfully in comparison with an ideal or natural light source
(which can be proven by
[measurements](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Color_rendering_index)).
CFLs also need some time to achieve their full potential after turning
them on, which makes them unsuitable for rooms where the light is
switched on only for short periods.



CFLs contain mercury and should be treated as toxic waste at the end of
their life – a fact that is hard to combine with eco-friendliness. It is
correct that coal power plants also emit mercury, and if the electricity
to power your home is produced by coal plants then the energy savings of
a CFL will actually result in [lower overall mercury
emissions](http://e360.yale.edu/content/digest.msp?id=1499). However, if
your house is powered by renewable energy, and that’s what
environmentalists want us to do, a CFL is not a green choice.

Light Emitting Diodes (LEDs)

The drawbacks of CFLs are slowly gaining recognition even amongst
critics of the incandescent light bulb. More and more, compact
fluorescent lamps are considered to be an [interim
technology](http://www.treehugger.com/files/2006/09/led_lightbulb_r_1.php),
awaiting the arrival of [Light Emitting
Diodes](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Light-emitting_diode) (LEDs) and
[Organic Light Emitting Diodes](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OLED)
(OLEDs).

Strikingly, exactly [the same thing is happening with
biofuels]({filename}/posts/algae-fuel-biof.md),
where advocates eventually accepted the unforeseen disadvantages but
point to a next generation of technology which offers all the benefits
without the drawbacks.

LEDs do not contain mercury and they are even more energy-efficient than
CFLs, while boasting even longer life expectancies. However, also this
technology still has to fulfil its promises. LEDs have become a mature
and clearly advantageous technology when it comes to coloured lighting –
red, green, yellow. This makes them a very good choice for traffic
lights, for instance. White light – the light that we need most to light
up our homes and streets – is another story.



White LEDs are considerably less energy efficient, have lower life
expectancies and can become very hot. High powered white LEDs are
equipped with a fan to cool them down – introducing extra energy
consumption, noise and breaking possibilities. Also, there is evidence
that high power white LEDs can [damage
health](http://texyt.com/bright+blue+leds+annoyance+health+risks). And
last but not least: white light from a LED looks very much like the
light of a welder: more blue than white, and everything but cosy.

Viva Las Vegas

At the moment, LED technology is no competition for the incandescent
light bulb. However, it can be considered a worthy improvement of
another technology: neon lights. And that’s the problem. Whether or not
white LEDs will finally arrive, the success of coloured LEDs is a fact.
New applications are appearing every day, and even though some of them
are definitely useful, they all introduce lighting in places and
situations where there was no lighting before.



Pasting many thousands of LEDs on a large building, with the sole
purpose of decoration, seems to be the new hot thing in architecture.
Dozens of examples (including the pictures on this page) can be found
[here](http://deputy-dog.com/2008/07/6-of-most-illuminated-buildings-on.html),
[here](http://nait5.wordpress.com/category/projects/media-facade/),
[here](http://www.interactivearchitecture.org/category/lighting),
[here](http://www.magicmonkey.net/) and
[here](http://www.colorkinetics.com/showcase/architecture/index.html?page=0&s_id=1).
The people behind these projects almost always emphasize the energy
efficiency of the lighting technology used, but of course no energy is
saved here, on the contrary.

The LED lights attached to facades (sometimes more than 200,000 of them)
are not substituting incandescent light bulbs, they substitute a non-lit
façade. So what counts is the extra energy consumption introduced by
these LED-curtains, not the energy savings compared to wrapping a
building in incandescent lights or neon – which nobody would do, except
in Las Vegas.

Solar panels

Gigantic billboards are another emerging application of LEDs. Bejing has
two of them. [Greenpix](http://www.greenpix.org/) measures 2,200 square
meters, another screen in the same city – placed not vertically but
horizontally as a [roof over a
street](http://www.ledsmagazine.com/features/4/1/5) - measures 7,500 m².
In Dubai, a [33 story
LED-display](http://www.gulfnews.com/business/Real_Estate_Property/10250190.html)
is planned, visible to a distance up to 1.5 kilometres, to be attached
to a skyscraper.



Greenpix is powered by solar panels, and therefore it is marketed as “a
radical example of sustainable technology”. Of course, it is not. It
takes energy to [manufacture solar
panels]({filename}/posts/the-ugly-side-o.md).
Introducing renewable energy lowers energy consumption only if it
substitutes existing energy production.

Translucent concrete and luminous pavement

Two other recent inventions that should raise concern: [translucent
concrete](http://www.litracon.hu/) and [luminous
pavement](http://www.kiss-textil.de/wisdomen.htm). In the near future,
we will leave the light on in every room of our house, not for
ourselves, but for the passer-by on the street and for the neighbours.
LED-walls can display moving images, controlled by a computer. Every
wall, every building, every bridge and every paving-stone could become a
medium for communication.

LEDs could revolutionise interior design and the list of products that
can be “augmented” by LEDs seems infinite. Some examples: [taps and
showerheads that change the colour of the water according to
temperature](http://www.iwantoneofthose.com/new-arrivals/glow-flow-tap/index.html),
[colour changing book
shelves](http://technabob.com/blog/2006/09/23/color-changing-led-shelves/),
[illuminated](http://www.lumalive.com/)
[clothing](http://www.lumigram.com/catalog/index.php?cPath=1) and
[accessories](http://www.globalsources.com/manufacturers/LED-Clothing.html),
[slippers](http://www.brightfeetslippers.com/), [safety
clothing](http://www.advancedsafetyequipment.com/sales/led.html),
[garden](http://www.ecofriend.org/entry/spectacular-led-lights-powered-by-the-wind-and-the-sun/)
[lights](http://www.ecofriend.org/entry/a-beautiful-way-to-illuminate-your-peripheral-surroundings/),
[garden
benches](http://www.ballerhouse.com/2008/06/30/the-lightbench-gives-the-park-bench-a-new-glow/),
[speed bumps and
crossings](http://www.itemltd.com/content/section/9/44/).



Some of these applications are worthwhile. Most notably, LEDs promise to
make traffic
[safer](http://www.itemltd.com/component/option,com_frontpage/Itemid,1/).
And many people will be thrilled by the emerging design possibilities.
But this technology will NOT lower energy consumption, on the contrary.
There will be much more lighting everywhere, and because this lighting
is more efficient, the best that can happen is that energy consumption
will *not rise*.

In fact, that’s exactly what the shopkeeper’s association in Madrid
answered last December, when Spanish newspaper El País asked why there
was such a striking increase of Christmas lights compared to the year
before: “LEDs consume much less energy, so we can use much more lights
without consuming more energy”.

The energy efficiency paradox

It is a common misconception that energy efficiency always leads to
energy savings. This might be true in some cases, but not in most.
Computers, televisions and car engines are good examples. All these
technologies have become much more efficient during the last decades,
but their energy consumption has been constant or on the rise.



Even the arrival of a radically new energy efficient technology –
comparable to the change from Edison bulbs to LEDs – is no guarantee.
LCD and plasma television technology is in itself considerably more
energy efficient than the conventional cathode-ray tube. There was a for a reduction in energy consumption, but instead it was
decided to use the technology to make larger televisions without raising
power consumption (too much).

There are so many examples of the energy efficiency paradox that it is
hard to believe that this mechanism (already described in 1865 by
Stanley Jevons and further developed by Daniel Khazzoom en Len Brookes
in the 1970s) is still [so
controversial](http://www.alternet.org/environment/84982/?page=entire#comments).
Maybe LEDs will finally convince us, because they promise to become one
of the most powerful examples to date.



The paradox is very hard to prove for compact fluorescent lamps, because
they did not bring about new applications. It could be that people are
tempted to install more lights and leave them on for longer periods,
because they know they consume less - but that’s very hard to prove, and
not so likely either. With LEDs, however, the situation is vastly
different. Your desk lamp might use less energy in 10 years time, but
the technology that made it happen will also light the exterior of all
buildings and infrastructure in your city.

More instruments needed

LEDs illustrate the danger of a purely technological approach to energy
conservation. A technology that was originally designed to save energy,
gives way to all kinds of new applications that might eventually raise
energy consumption considerably. The evolution of technology is
unpredictable, and therefore technology should never be the only
solution to a problem.

Outlawing incandescent light bulbs – which several countries plan to do
– is no solution either. The guy burning one light bulb in his little
room (and maybe using the excess heat of his bulb as heating in winter)
damages the environment a whole lot less than the guy on the other side
of the street who decorates his mansion and garden like a casino with
LEDs. There is a lot of room to lower energy consumption *without*
switching to new technology. Something is awfully wrong with our
approach to energy conservation.

  ---
    
 ---



All this does not mean that energy efficiency is a bad thing. It brings
economical gains and many other advantages: faster cars, more powerful
and smaller computers, larger televisions. For many of us, these are all
very important achievements. Energy efficiency also *offers the
possibility* for a reduction in energy consumption, but this does not
happen automatically.

More is needed to translate energy efficiency into energy reduction. A
carbon tax or higher energy prices, for instance. Together with these
instruments, energy efficiency can be a very powerful tool. Without
them, energy efficiency works against us when it comes to saving energy.

© Kris De Decker (edited by Vincent Grosjean)

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Pictures can be found
[here](http://deputy-dog.com/2008/07/6-of-most-illuminated-buildings-on.html),
[here](http://nait5.wordpress.com/category/projects/media-facade/),
[here](http://www.interactivearchitecture.org/category/lighting),
[here](http://www.magicmonkey.net/) and
[here](http://www.colorkinetics.com/showcase/architecture/index.html?page=0&s_id=1).
First and last picture (below) : [Rune
Guneriussen](http://www.runeguneriussen.no/index.html)

Updates:

1\. [EU bans incandescent light
bulb](http://features.csmonitor.com/environment/2008/10/15/eu-bans-incandescent-light-bulbs/)

2\. The insane hardware driving [the world's biggest LED
billboard](http://gizmodo.com/5096475/the-insane-hardware-driving-the-worlds-biggest-led-billboard)

3\. Why are we so amazed by colourful lights at night? Because [this is
what we saw before we started to light up the
night](http://img367.imageshack.us/img367/1749/summermilkywayjg6.jpg).

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Further reading on the energy efficiency paradox

[Herbert Inhaber, Why Energy Conservation Fails,
1997](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/1567205976?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=1567205976)![](http://www.assoc-amazon.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=as2&o=1&a=1567205976){width="1"
height="1"}

[Stanley Jevons, The Coal Question,
1865](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B000VB9BH6?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=B000VB9BH6)![](http://www.assoc-amazon.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=as2&o=1&a=B000VB9BH6){width="1"
height="1"}

[Vaclac Smil, Energy at the Crossroads,
2003](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0262693240?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0262693240)![](http://www.assoc-amazon.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=as2&o=1&a=0262693240){width="1"
height="1"}

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  ---
    
 ---

### Related Articles



-   [How (not) to resolve the energy
    crisis]({filename}/posts/renewable-energy-is-not-enough.md)
    : renewable energy is not enough
-   [Moonlight
    towers]({filename}/posts/moonlight-towers-light-pollution-in-the-1800s.md)
    : light pollution in the 1800s
-   [The age of
    speed]({filename}/posts/speed-energy.md):
    how to reduce global fuel consumption by 75 percent, today
-   [The Citroën
    2CV]({filename}/posts/citroen-2cv.md):
    cleantech from the 1940s
-   [The monster footprint of digital
    technology]({filename}/posts/embodied-energy-of-digital-technology.md)
    : how much energy do our gadgets really use?
-   [Who killed the electric
    grid]({filename}/posts/fast-charging-electric-cars-off-peak-grid.md)?
    Fast-charging electric cars

[Main
page](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/)[](http://www.feedburner.com/fb/a/emailverifySubmit?feedId=1685209&loc=en_US)

[Low-tech
solutions](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/low-tech-solutions.html) /
[Obsolete
technology](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/obsolete-technology.html) /
[Ecotech myths](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/ecotech-myths.html) /
[Mixed links & updates](http://www.notechmagazine.com/)

  ---
    
 ---



  

  

  

