Title: How Sustainable is Stored Sunlight?
Date: 2015-05-03 16:18
Author: Kris De Decker
Category: High-tech Problems
Slug: sustainability-off-grid-solar-power
Status: published



One of the constraints of solar power is that it is not always
available: it is dependent on daylight hours and clear skies. In order
to fill these gaps, a storage solution or a backup infrastructure of
fossil fuel power plants is required&mdash;a factor that is often ignored
when scientists investigate the sustainability of PV systems.

Whether or not to include storage is no longer just an academic
question. Driven by better battery technology and the disincentivization
of grid-connected solar panels, off-grid solar is about to make a
comeback. How sustainable is a solar PV system if energy storage is
taken into account?

Picture: Tesla's lithium-ion home storage system.

In the [previous
article]({filename}/posts/how-sustainable-is-pv-solar-power.md),
we have seen that many life cycle analyses (LCAs) of solar PV systems
have a positive bias. Most LCAs base their studies on the manufacturing
of solar cells in Europe or the USA. However, most panels are now
produced in China, where the electric grid is about twice as
carbon-intensive and about 50% less energy efficient.
\[[1](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2015/05/sustainability-off-grid-solar-power.html#notes)\]
Likewise, most LCAs investigate solar PV systems in regions with a solar
insolation typical of the Mediterranean region, while the majority of
solar panels have been installed in places with only half as much
sunshine.

As a consequence, the embodied greenhouse gas emissions of a kWh of
electricity generated by solar PV is two to four times higher than most
LCAs indicate. Instead of the oft-cited 30-50 grams of CO2-equivalents
per kilowatt-hour of generated electricity (gCO2e/kWh), we calculated
that the typical solar PV system installed between 2008 and 2014
produces close to 120 gCO2e/kWh. This makes solar PV only four times
less carbon-intensive than conventional grid electricity in most western
countries.

However, even this result is overly optimistic. In the previous article,
we didn't take into account "one of the potentially largest missing
components"
\[[2](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2015/05/sustainability-off-grid-solar-power.html#notes)\]
of the usual life cycle analysis of PV systems: the embodied energy of
the infrastructure that deals with the intermittency of solar power.
Solar insolation varies throughout the day and throughout the season,
and of course solar energy is not available after sunset.

Off-grid Solar Power is Back

Until the end of the 1990s, most solar installations were off-grid
systems. Excess power during the day was stored in an on-site bank of
lead-acid batteries for use during the night and on cloudy days. Today,
almost all solar systems are grid-connected. These installations use the
grid as if it was a battery, "storing" excess energy during the day for
use at night and on cloudy days.

Obviously, this strategy requires a backup of fossil fuel or nuclear
power plants that step in when the supply of solar energy is low or
nonexistent. To make a fair comparison with conventional grid
electricity, including electricity generated by biomass, this "hidden"
part of the solar PV system should also be taken into account. However,
every single life cycle analyse of a solar PV ignores it. \[[3,
2](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2015/05/sustainability-off-grid-solar-power.html#notes)\].

Until now, whether or not to include backup power or storage systems was
mainly an academic question. This might change soon, because off-grid
solar is about to make a comeback. Several manufacturers have presented
storage systems based on lithium-ion batteries, the technology that also
powers our gadgets and electric cars. \[[4, 5, 6,
7](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2015/05/sustainability-off-grid-solar-power.html#notes)\]
Lithium-ion batteries are a superior technology compared to the
lead-acid batteries commonly used in off-grid solar PV systems: they
last longer, are more compact, more efficient, easier to maintain, and
comparatively more sustainable.



Source: [Rocky Mountain
Institute](http://www.rmi.org/electricity_grid_defection) /
[Greentechmedia](http://www.greentechmedia.com/articles/featured/Storage-Is-the-New-Solar-Will-Batteries-and-PV-Create-an-Unstoppable-Hybri).

Lithium-ion batteries are more expensive than lead-acid batteries, but
Morgan Stanley's 2014 report on solar energy predicts that the price of
storage will come down to \$125-\$150 per kWh by 2020.
\[[8](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2015/05/sustainability-off-grid-solar-power.html#notes)\]
According to the report, this would make solar PV plus battery storage
commercially viable in some European countries (Germany, Italy,
Portugal, Spain) and across most of the United States. Morgan Stanley
expects a lot from electric vehicle manufacturer Tesla, who announced a
home storage system for solar power a few days ago (costing \$350 per
kWh).
\[[9](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2015/05/sustainability-off-grid-solar-power.html#notes)\]
Tesla is building a factory in Arizona that will produce as many
lithium-ion batteries as there are currently produced by all
manufacturers in the world, introducing economies of scale that can push
costs further down.

> Morgan Stanley expects off-grid solar PV to be commercially viable in
> some European countries and across most of the USA by 2020

Other factors also come into play when it comes to home storage for PV
power. Solar panels have become so much cheaper in recent years that
government subsidies and tax credits for grid-connected systems have
come under pressure. In many countries, owners of a grid-connected solar
PV system have received a fixed price for the surplus electricity they
provide to the grid, without having to pay fixed grid rates. These
so-called "net metering rules" or "feed-in rates" were recently
abolished in several European countries, and are now under pressure in
some US states. In its report, Morgan Stanley predicts that, in the
coming years, net metering rules and solar tax credits will disappear
altogether.
\[[8](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2015/05/sustainability-off-grid-solar-power.html#notes)\]



A 5 kWh lithium-ion battery pack from [Powertech
Systems](http://www.powertechsystems.eu/en/li-ion-battery-applications/power-storage/self-consumption/).

Utility companies are fighting the incentivisation of PV power
succesfully with the argument that solar customers make use of the grid
but don't pay for it, raising the costs for non-solar customers.
\[[10](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2015/05/sustainability-off-grid-solar-power.html#notes)\]
The irony is that the disincentivization of grid-connected solar panels
makes off-grid systems more attractive, and that utilities might be
chasing away their customers. If a grid-connected solar customer has to
pay fixed grid fees and doesn't receive a good price for his or her
excess power, it might become more financially savvy to install a bank
of batteries. The more customers do this, the higher the costs will
become for the remaining consumers, encouraging more people to adopt
off-grid systems.
\[[11](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2015/05/sustainability-off-grid-solar-power.html#notes)\]

Lead-Acid Battery Storage

Being totally independent of the grid might sound attractive to many,
but how sustainable is a solar PV system when battery storage is taken
into account? Because a life cycle analysis of an off-grid solar system
with lithium-ion batteries has not yet been done, we made one ourselves,
based on some LCAs of stand-alone solar PV systems with lead-acid
battery storage.

One of the most complete studies to date is a 2009 LCA of a 4.2 kW
off-grid system in Murcia, Spain. The 35 m2 PV solar array is mounted on
a building rooftop and supplies a programmed lighting system with a
daily constant load pattern of 13.8 kWh. The solar panels are connected
to 24 open lead-acid batteries with a storage capacity of 110.4 kWh,
offering three days of autonomy.
\[[12](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2015/05/sustainability-off-grid-solar-power.html#notes)\]
The study found an energy payback time of 9.08 years and specific
greenhouse gas emissions of 131 gCO2e/kWh, which makes the system twice
as energy efficient and 2.5 times less carbon-intensive than
conventional grid electricity in Spain (337 gCO2/kWh). Manufacturing the
batteries accounts for 45% of the embodied CO2, and 49% of the life
cycle energy use of the solar system.

> Lead-acid batteries easily double the energy and CO2 payback times of
> a solar PV system

This doesn't sound too bad, but unfortunately the researchers made some
pretty optimistic assumptions. First of all, the results are valid for a
solar insolation of 1,932 kWh/m2/yr&mdash;Murcia is one of the sunniest
places in Spain. At lower solar insolation, more solar panels would be
needed to produce as much electricity, so the embodied energy of the
total system will increase.
\[[13](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2015/05/sustainability-off-grid-solar-power.html#notes)\].
If we assume a solar insolation of 1,700 kWh/m2/yr, the average in
Southern Europe, GHG emissions would increase to 139 gCO2e/kWh. If we
assume a solar insolation of 1,000 kWh/m2/yr, the average in Germany,
emissions amount to 174 gCO2/kWh.

Battery Lifespan

Secondly, the researchers assume the lifespan of the lead-acid batteries
to be 10 years. For the solar panels, they assume a lifetime of 20
years, which means that they included double the amount of batteries in
the life cycle analysis. A lifespan of ten years is very optimistic for
a lead-acid battery&mdash;a fact that the scientists admit.
\[[12](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2015/05/sustainability-off-grid-solar-power.html#notes)\]
Most other LCA's looking at off-grid systems assume a battery life of 3
or 5 years \[[14,
15](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2015/05/sustainability-off-grid-solar-power.html#notes)\].
However, the lifetime of a lead-acid battery depends strongly on use and
maintenance. Because of the low load of the system under discussion, a
battery lifespan of 10 years is not completely unrealistic.

On the other hand, if the batteries are used for higher loads&mdash;for
example, in a common household&mdash;their lifetime would shorten
considerably. Because almost 50% of embodied CO2 and life cycle energy
use of a PV solar system is due to the batteries alone, the expected
lifespan of the 2.4 ton battery pack has a profound effect on the
sustainability of the system.



A lead-acid battery system.
[SuperiorSolar](http://www.superiorsolar.com.au/galleries/off-grid-solar-power-systems).

If we assume a battery lifespan of 5 instead of 10 years, and keep the
other parameters the same, the GHG emissions increase to 198 and 233
gCO2e/kWh for a solar insolation of 1,700 and 1,000 kWh/m2/yr,
respectively. In grid-connected solar PV systems, assuming a longer life
expectancy for the solar panels improves the sustainability of the
system: the embodied energy and CO2 can be spread over a longer period
of time. With off-grid systems, this effect is countered by the need for
one or more replacements of the batteries.

If we increase the life expectancy of the solar panels from 20 to 30
years, and keep the battery lifespan at 10 years, CO2e emissions per kWh
remain more or less the same. However, if we assume a battery lifespan
of only 5 years and extend the lifespan of the solar panels to 30 years,
GHG emissions would increase to 206 gCO2e/kWh for a solar insolation of
1,700 kWh/m2/yr, and decrease to 232 gCO2e/kWh for a solar insolation of
1,000 kWh/m2/yr.

Made in China

Thirdly, the researchers assume that all components&mdash;PV cells,
batteries, electronics&mdash;are made in Spain, while we have seen in the
previous article that [manufacturing of solar PV systems has moved to
China]({filename}/posts/how-sustainable-is-pv-solar-power.md).
Spain's electricity grid is 2.7 times less carbon-intensive (337
gCO2/kWh) than China's electric infrastructure (900 gCO2e/kWh), which
means that the GHG emissions of all components of our system can be
multiplied by 2.7. This results in specific carbon emissions of 353 and
471 gCO2e/kWh for a solar insolation of 1,700 and 1,000 kWh/m2/yr,
respectively, which is higher than the carbon-intensity of the Spanish
grid. Considering a battery lifespan of 5 instead of 10 years, emissions
would rise to 513 and 631 gCO2e/kWh for a solar insolation of 1,700 and
1,000 kWh/m2/yr, respectively.

> If solar panels and batteries are produced in China, the CO2-emissions
> are double those of conventional grid electricity

Although there are some assumptions by the researchers that are less
optimistic&mdash;such as a battery recycling rate of only 50% instead of
the more commonly assumed +90%&mdash;it's obvious that an off-grid system
with lead-acid batteries is not sustainable, and definitely not when the
components are manufactured in China. That doesn't make off-grid solar
with lead-acid batteries pointless: compared to a diesel generator, a
solar PV system with lead-acid batteries is often the better choice,
which makes it a good solution for remote areas without access to the
power grid. As an alternative for the centralized electricity
infrastructure in western countries, however, it makes little sense.

Lithium-ion Battery Storage System

When we replace the lead-acid batteries by lithium-ion batteries, the
sustainability of a stand-alone solar PV system improves considerably.
At first glance this may seem counter-productive, because it takes more
energy to produce 1 kWh of lithium-ion battery storage than it takes to
manufacure 1 kWh of lead-acid battery storage. According to the latest
LCA's, aimed at electric vehicle storage, the making of a lithium-ion
battery requires between 1.4 and 1.87 MJ/wh, \[[16, 17,
18](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2015/05/sustainability-off-grid-solar-power.html#notes)\]
while the energy requirements for the manufacture of a lead-acid battery
are between 0.87 and 1.19 MJ/Wh. \[[18,
12](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2015/05/sustainability-off-grid-solar-power.html#notes)\]



6.6 kWh Energy management and lithium-ion storage solution in one.
[Bosch Power
Tec](https://www.bosch-power-tec.com/en/bpte/storage_solutions/bpt_s_5_hybrid/vs_5_hybrid).

Despite this, the higher overall performance of the lithium-ion battery
means that considerably less storage is required. For a prolonged
lifetime, lead-acid batteries demand a limited "Depth of Discharge"
(DoD). If a lead-acid battery is fully discharged (DoD of 100%) its
lifespan becomes very short (300 to 800 cycles, or roughly one to two
years, depending on battery chemistry). The lifespan increases to
between 400 and 1,000 cycles (1-3 years, assuming 365 cycles per year)
at a DoD of 80%, and to between 900 and 2,000 cycles (2.5-5.5 years) at
a DoD of 33%.
\[[18](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2015/05/sustainability-off-grid-solar-power.html#notes)\].
This means that, in order to get a decent lifespan, a lead-acid battery
system should be oversized. For example, three times more battery
capacity is needed at a DoD of 33%, because two thirds of the battery
capacity cannot be used.

Although the lifespan of a lithium-ion battery also decreases when the
depth of discharge increases, this effect is less pronounced than with
its lead-acid counterpart. A lithium-ion battery lasts 3,000 to 5,000
cycles (8-14 years) at a DoD of 100%, 5,000 to 7,000 cycles (14-19
years) at a DoD of 80%, and 7,000 to 10,000 cycles (19-27 years) at a
DoD of 33%.
\[[18](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2015/05/sustainability-off-grid-solar-power.html#notes)\]
As a consequence, lithium-ion storage usually has a DoD of 80%, while
lead-acid storage usually has a DoD of 33 or 50%. In the LCA of the
Spanish off-grid system discussed above, the assumption of three days of
autonomy implies that 41 kWh of storage is required (3 x 13.8 kWh per
day). Because the DoD is 33%, total storage capacity should be
multiplied by three, which results in 123 kWh of batteries. If we would
replace these by lithium-ion batteries with a DoD of 80%, only 50 kWh of
storage is needed, or 2.5 times less.

6 x Less Batteries Needed

For utmost accuracy, we should mention that the lifespan of a battery
isn't necessarily limited by the cycle life. When batteries are used in
applications with shallow cycling, their service life will normally be
limited by float life. In this case, the difference between lead-acid
and lithium-ion is less pronounced: at no-cycling (float charge),
lithium-ion lasts 14-16 years and lead-acid 8-12 years. Battery life
will be limited by either the life cycle or the float service life,
depending on which condition will be achieved first.
\[[18](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2015/05/sustainability-off-grid-solar-power.html#notes)\]
Nevertheless, if we focus on off-grid systems for households, the
assumption of deep daily cycling better reflects reality, although there
will be periods of float charge, for example during holidays.

> The total storage capacity to be manufactured over the complete
> lifetime of a solar PV system is 6 times lower for lithium-ion than
> for lead-acid

If we also factor in the lifespan of the batteries, the advantage of
lithium-ion becomes even larger. Assuming a lifespan of 20 years for the
solar PV system and a DoD of 80%, the lithium-ion batteries will last as
long as the PV panels. On the other hand, the lead-acid batteries have
to be replaced at least 2-4 times over a period of 20 years. This
further widens the gap in energy use for manufacturing when comparing
lead-acid and lithium-ion batteries.
\[[18](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2015/05/sustainability-off-grid-solar-power.html#notes)\]
In the original LCA, a total storage capacity of about 240 kWh is needed
over a lifespan of 20 years. On the other hand, the cycle life of the
lithium-ion battery is 19-27 years, meaning that no replacement may be
needed. Consequently, the total storage capacity to be manufactured over
the complete lifetime of the system is 6 times lower for lithium-ion
than for lead-acid.
\[[19](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2015/05/sustainability-off-grid-solar-power.html#notes)\]



E3DC lithium-ion battery system. Picture: [Thomas
Salzmann](http://www.e3dc.com/index.php?id=156).

If we take the most optimistic values for energy during manufacturing,
being 0.87 MJ/Wh for lead-acid and 1.4 MJ/Wh for lithium-ion, and
multiply them by total battery capacity over a lifetime of 20 years
(248,000 Wh for lead-acid and 42,000 Wh for lithium-ion), this results
in an embodied energy of 60 MWh for lead-acid (the value in the original
LCA) and only 16.5 MWh for lithium. In conclusion, energy requirements
for the manufacturing of the batteries is 3.6 times lower for
lithium-ion than for lead-acid.

Another advantage of lithium-ion batteries is that they have a higher
efficiency than lead-acid batteries: 85-95% for lithium-ion, compared to
70-85% for lead-acid. Because losses in the battery must be compensated
with higher energy input, a higher battery efficiency results in a
smaller PV array, lowering the energy requirements to manufacture the
solar cells. In the original LCA, 4.2 kW of solar panels (35 m2) are
needed to produce 13.8 kWh per day. If we assume the lead-acid batteries
to be 77% efficient, and the lithium-ion batteries to be 90% efficient,
the choice for lithium-ion would resize the solar PV array from 4.2 kW
to 3.55 kW. We now have all the data to calculate the greenhouse gas
emissions per kWh of electricity produced by an off-grid solar PV system
using lithium-ion batteries.

GHG Emissions of the Off-grid System with Lithium-ion Batteries

In the original LCA, the batteries and the solar panels (including
frames and supports) account for 59 and 62 gCO2e/kWh, respectively. The
rest of the components add another 10 gCO2e/kWh, resulting in a total of
131 gCO2e/kWh. If we switch to lithium-ion battery storage, the
greenhouse gas emissions for the batteries come down from 59 to 20
gCO2e/kWh. Because of the higher efficiency of the lithium-ion
batteries, the greenhouse gas emissions for the solar panels come down
from 62 to 55 gCO2e/kWh. This brings the total greenhouse gas emissions
of the off-grid system using lithium-ion batteries to 85 gCO2e/kWh,
compared to 131 gCO2e/kWh for a similar system with lead-acid storage.

While this result is an improvement, it's dependent on the assumptions
of the researchers; most notably, a solar insolation of 1,932 kWh/m2/yr,
and that all manufacturing of components occurs in Spain. If we adjust
the value for a solar insolation of 1,700 kWh/m2/yr in order to compare
with the other results, total GHG emissions become 92.5 gCO2e/kWh
(assuming battery capacity remains the same). If we correct for a solar
insolation of 1,000 kWh/m2/yr, the average in Germany, GHG emissions
become 123.5 gCO2e/kWh. Furthermore, if we assume that the solar panels
(but not the batteries or the other components) are manufactured in
China, which is most likely the case, GHG emissions rise to 155 and 217
gCO2e/kWh for a solar insolation of 1,700 and 1,000 kWh/m2/yr,
respectively.



Testing a lithium-ion battery. Picture: [A123
Systems](http://www.a123systems.com/media-room-photos.htm).

In conclusion, lithium-ion battery storage makes off-grid solar PV less
carbon-intensive than conventional grid electricity in most western
countries, even if the manufacturing of solar panels in China is taken
into account. However, the advantage is rather small, which effects the
speed at which solar PV systems can be deployed in a sustainable way. In
the [previous
article]({filename}/posts/how-sustainable-is-pv-solar-power.md),
we have seen that the energy and CO2 savings made by the cumulative
installed capacity of solar PV systems are cancelled out to some extent
by the energy use and CO2 emissions from the production of new installed
capacity. For the deployment of solar systems to grow while remaining
net greenhouse gas mitigators, they must grow at a rate slower than the
inverse of their CO2 payback time. \[[20, 21,
22](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2015/05/sustainability-off-grid-solar-power.html#notes)\]

> Off-grid solar systems with lithium-ion battery storage can have GHG
> emissions below 30 gCO2e/kWh if they are produced in countries with
> clean electricity grids, and installed in countries with high solar
> insolation and carbon-intensive grids.

For solar panels manufactured in China and installed in countries like
Germany, the maximum sustainable growth rate is only 16-23% (depending
on solar insolation), roughly 3 times lower than the actual annual
growth of the industry between 2008 and 2014. If we also take
lithium-ion battery storage into account, the maximum sustainable growth
rate comes down to 4-14%. In other words, including energy storage
further limits the maximum sustainable growth rate of the solar PV
industry.

On the other hand, if we would produce solar panels in countries with
very clean electricity grids (France, Canada, etc.) and install them in
countries with carbon-intensive grids and high solar insolation (China,
Australia, etc.), even off-grid systems with lithium-ion batteries would
have GHG emissions of only 26-29 gCO2/kWh, which would allow solar PV to
grow sustainably by almost 60% per year. This result is remarkable and
shows the importance of location if we want solar PV to be a solution
instead of a problem. Of course, whether or not there's enough lithium
available to deploy battery storage on a large scale, is another
question.

Battery Production Powered by Renewable Energy?

Another way to improve the sustainability of battery storage is to
produce the batteries using renewable energy. For example, Tesla
announced that its "GigaFactory", which will produce lithium-ion
batteries for vehicles and home storage, will be powered by renewable
energy. \[[23,
24](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2015/05/sustainability-off-grid-solar-power.html#notes)\]
To support their claim, Tesla published an illustration of the factory
with the roof covered in solar panels and a few dozen windmills in the
distance.

However, the final manufacturing process in the factory consumes only a
small portion of the total energy cost of the entire production cycle --
much more energy is used during material extraction (mining). It's
stated that the GigaFactory will produce 50 GWh of battery capacity per
year by 2020. Because the making of 1 kWh of lithium-ion battery storage
requires 400 kWh of energy \[16, 17, 18\], producing 50 GWh of batteries
would require 20,000 GWh of energy per year.



If we assume an average solar insolation of 2,000 kWh/m2/yr and a solar
PV efficiency of 15%, one m2 of solar panels would generate at most 295
kWh per year. This means that it would take 6,800 hectares (ha) of solar
panels to run the complete production process of the batteries on solar
power, while the solar panels on the roof cover an area of only 1 to 40
ha (there is some controversy over the actual surface area of the
factory under construction). Tesla's claim, though potentially factually
accurate, is an obvious example of greenwashing&mdash;and everyone seems to
buy it.

There are other ways to improve the sustainability of solar PV when
storage is taken into account. Most of these solutions require that
solar systems remain connected to the grid, even if they have a (more
limited) local storage system. In this scenario, chemical batteries
could help to balance the grid system, acting as peak-shaving and
load-shifting devices. The electric grid has to be sized to meet peak
demand, and battery storage could mean that less power plants are needed
for that. Decentralized, grid-connected energy storage could also
increase the share of renewables that the electricity infrastructure can
handle. Of course, this "smart grid" approach should also be subjected
to a life cycle analysis, [including all electronic
components]({filename}/posts/embodied-energy-of-digital-technology.md).

Kris De Decker (edited by Jenna Collett)

[]{#notes}

Sources & Notes:

\[1\] [Domestic and overseas manufacturing scenarios of silicon-based
photovoltaics: life cycle energy and environmental comparative
analysis](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0038092X14001935).
Dajun Yue, Fengqi You, Seth B. Darling, in Solar Energy, May 2014

\[2\] [Energy Payback for Energy Systems Ensembles During
Growth](http://web.mit.edu/ebm/www/Publications/Energy%20Payback%20IEEE%20ISSST%20FINAL.pdf)
(PDF), Timothy Gutowski, Stanley Gershwin and Tonio Bounassisi, IEEE,
International Symposium on Sustainable Systems and Technologies,
Washington D.C., May 16-19, 2010

\[3\] "[Current State of Development of Electricity-Generating
Technologies: A Literature
Review](http://www.mdpi.com/1996-1073/3/3/462)", Manfred Lenzen,
Energies, Volume 3, Issue 3, 2010.

\[4\] "[Storage is the new solar: will batteries and PV create an
unstoppable hybrid
force?](http://www.greentechmedia.com/articles/featured/Storage-Is-the-New-Solar-Will-Batteries-and-PV-Create-an-Unstoppable-Hybri)",
Stephen Lacey, Greentechmedia, 2015

\[5\] "[Report: Solar Paired with Storage is a 'Real, Near and Present'
Threat to
Utilities](http://www.greentechmedia.com/articles/read/where-and-when-customers-may-start-leaving-the-grid)",
Stephen Lacey, greentechmedia, 2014

\[6\] "[Australia to pilot new power
plan](http://www.abc.net.au/environment/articles/2014/05/01/3995957.htm)",
Gregg Borschmann, ABC, May 2014

\[7\] "[SolarCity Launches Energy Storage for Business Using Tesla
Battery
Packs](http://www.greentechmedia.com/articles/read/SolarCity-Launches-Energy-Storage-for-Businesses-Using-Tesla-Battery-Packs)",
Eric Wesoff, greentechmedia, December 2013

\[8\] "[Solar Power & Energy Storage: Policy Factors vs. Improving
Economics](http://regmedia.co.uk/2014/08/06/morgan_stanley_energy_storage_blue_paper_2014.pdf)"
(PDF), Morgan Stanley Blue Paper, July 28, 2014

\[9\] "[Tesla announces home battery
system](http://hardware.slashdot.org/story/15/05/01/1220207/tesla-announces-home-battery-system)",
Slashdot, May 1, 2015

\[10\] "[Utilities wage campaign against rooftop
solar](http://www.washingtonpost.com/national/health-science/utilities-sensing-threat-put-squeeze-on-booming-solar-roof-industry/2015/03/07/2d916f88-c1c9-11e4-ad5c-3b8ce89f1b89_story.html)",
Joby Warrick, The Washington Post, March 2015

\[11\] "[Disruptive Challenges: Financial Implications and Strategic
Responses to a Changing Retail Electric
Business](http://www.eei.org/ourissues/finance/Documents/disruptivechallenges.pdf)"
(PDF), Peter Kind, Energy Infrastructure Advocates, Edison Electric
Institute, January 2013

\[12\] "[Life cycle assessment study of a 4.2kWp stand-alone
photovoltaic system", R. García, in "solar
energy](http://www.mendeley.com/research/life-cycle-assessment-study-of-a-42kwp-standalone-photovoltaic-system/)",
september 2009.

\[13\] You could argue that you also need more battery storage, because
there is a bigger chance of cloudy days. However, we assume battery
capacity to remain the same.

\[14\] "[Optimal Sizing and Life Cycle Assessment of Residential
Photovoltaic Energy Systems With Battery
Storage](http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/pip.774/pdf)", A.
Celik, in "Progress in Photovoltaics: Research and Applications", 2008.

\[15\] "[Energy pay-back time of photovoltaic energy systems: present
status and
prospects](http://www.projects.science.uu.nl/nws/publica/Publicaties1998/98053.pdf)",
E.A. Alsema, in "Proceedings of the 2nd World Conference and Exhibition
on photovoltaics solar energy conversion", July 1998.

\[16\] "[Towards greener and more sustainable batteries for electrical
energy
storage](http://www.nature.com/nchem/journal/v7/n1/full/nchem.2085.html)",
D. Larcher and J.M. Tarascon, Nature Chemistry, November 2014

\[17\] "[Application of Life-Cycle Assessment to Nanoscale Technology:
Lithium-ion Batteries for Electric
Vehicles](http://www2.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2014-01/documents/lithium_batteries_lca.pdf)"
(PDF), Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 2013

\[18\] "[Energy Analysis of Batteries in Photovoltaic systems. Part one
(Performance and energy
requirements)](http://www.apmaths.uwo.ca/~mdavison/_library/natasha/batterytechnologies6.PDF)"
(PDF) and "[Part two (Energy Return Factors and Overall Battery
Efficiencies)](http://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&ved=0CCUQFjAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.researchgate.net%2Fprofile%2FBjoern_Sanden%2Fpublication%2F223843791_Energy_analysis_of_batteries_in_photovoltaic_systems._Part_II_Energy_return_factors_and_overall_battery_efficiencies%2Flinks%2F02bfe512b207d0d347000000.pdf&ei=IQBGVZ-BCZD3aqC_gKAI&usg=AFQjCNG6QpCpI8h0PMc-XfC5HfF4-0pIKA&sig2=gFGbOdmw_jQxG6jRirSMoQ&bvm=bv.92291466,d.d2s&cad=rja)"
(PDF). Energy Conversion and Management 46, 2005.

\[19\] The lifespan of the lithium-ion battery will probably be closer
to 14-16 years (float charge lifespan) because of the shallow cycling
assumption in the original LCA. However, since the assumed lifespan of
10 years for the lead-acid batteries is very optimistic, and because
deep cycling is more common for household off-grid systems, we assume
that no replacement of lithium-ion batteries is needed.

\[20\] "[The climate change mitigation potential of the solar PV
industry: a life cycle
perspective](http://www.slideshare.net/gregbriner/the-climate-change-mitigation-potential-of-the-solar-pv-industry-a-life-cycle-perspective)",
Greg Briner, 2009

\[21\] "[Optimizing Greenhouse Gas Mitigation Strategies to Suppress
Energy
Cannibalism](http://www.mse.mtu.edu/%7Epearce/papers/2009%20Canada%20Climate%20Conf.pdf)"
(PDF). J.M. Pearce. 2nd Climate Change Technology Conference, May 12-15,
2009, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

\[22\] "[Towards Real Energy Economics: Energy Policy Driven by
Life-Cycle Carbon
Emission](http://qspace.library.queensu.ca/handle/1974/5436)", R. Kenny,
C. Law, J.M. Pearce, Energy Policy 38, pp. 1969-1978, 2010

\[23\] "[Construction of Tesla's \$5B solar-powered Gigafactory in
Nevada is progressing
nicely](http://www.treehugger.com/cars/construction-tesla-5-billion-solar-powered-gigafactory-nevada-progressing-nicely.html)",
Michael Graham Richard, Treehugger 2014

\[24\] "[Tesla's \$5bn Gigafactory looks even cooler than expected, will
create 22,000
jobs](http://www.treehugger.com/cars/teslas-5-billion-gigafactory-looks-even-cooler-expected-22000-jobs.html)",
Michael Graham Richard, Treehugger 2015

Related Articles:

-   [How to get your apartment off the
    grid]({filename}/posts/how-to-go-off-grid-in-your-apartment.md)
-   [Slow electricity: the return of DC
    power]({filename}/posts/slow-electricity-the-return-of-low-voltage-dc-power.md)?
-   [PV solar power: why location
    matters]({filename}/posts/how-sustainable-is-pv-solar-power.md)
-   [The status-quo of electric cars: better batteries, same
    range]({filename}/posts/the-status-quo-of-electric-cars-better-batteries-same-range.md)
-   [Fruit walls: urban farming in the
    1600s]({filename}/posts/fruit-walls-urban-farming.md)
-   [The bright future of solar powered
    factories]({filename}/posts/solar-powered-factories.md)

