Title: The status quo of electric cars: better batteries, same range
Date: 2010-05-03 12:25
Author: Kris De Decker
Category: High-tech Problems
Tags: Batteries, electric cars, embodied energy, range
Slug: the-status-quo-of-electric-cars-better-batteries-same-range
Status: published



Electric motors and batteries have improved substantially over the past
one hundred years, but today's much hyped electric cars have a range
that is - at best - comparable to that of their predecessors at the
beginning of the 20th century. Weight, comfort, speed and performance
have eaten up any real progress. We don't need better batteries, we need
better cars.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The 2010 Nissan Leaf and Mitsubishi i-MiEV have exactly the same range
as the 1908 Fritchle Model A Victoria: 100 miles (160 kilometres) on a
single charge

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

From about 1895 to the mid-1920s, and following the [bicycle craze of
the
1890s]({filename}/posts/get-rid-of-cars-ride-a-bicycle.md),
electric cars shared the road with petrol and steam powered cars. EV's
were comparatively slow, heavy, and had a smaller range than their
alternatives. During the very early years, however, electric automobiles
were the most popular option for a short time, mainly because of two
reasons.

Firstly, they were easy to start, while a gasoline car had to be cranked
up and a steam powered car required a long firing-up time (not unlike a
[wood gas
car]({filename}/posts/wood-gas-cars.md)).
Secondly, there were few paved roads outside the city at the turn of the
20th century, which made the limited range of EV's not that problematic.
The production of electric vehicles peaked in 1912: during that time
there were 30,000 EV's on the road in the United States, two-thirds of
these were used as private passenger cars. Europe had around 4,000
electric vehicles.



By 1912, the gasoline car had already taken over the largest share of
the automobile sales (more than 90 percent). They were faster and could
drive longer distances - not only because of their better range but also
because of a more elaborate refuelling infrastructure. The rapidly
expanding paved road network worked in their favour, too.

Internal combustion engines became much cheaper than electrics. In 1908,
Ford introduced its mass-produced (and gasoline powered)
[Model-T](http://digitalgallery.nypl.org/nypldigital/dgkeysearchdetail.cfm?trg=1&strucID=1059019&imageID=1570668&total=389&num=200&parent_id=1058809&word=&s=&notword=&d=&c=&f=&k=0&sScope=&sLevel=&sLabel=&lword=&lfield=&imgs=20&pos=210&snum=&e=w),
which initially sold for 850 dollars - two to three times less than the
price of a similar electric vehicle. In 1912, the price of the Model-T
came down to 650 dollars. That same year, the electrical starter for
gasoline vehicles appeared, and took away one of the last selling points
of EV's. Last but not least, gasoline had become much cheaper than it
had been at the end of the 19th century.

The only advantage left was the (potential) cleanliness and
noiselessness of electric vehicles, the reason we want them back today.
In 1914, Henry Ford announced the marketing of a cheap mass-produced
electric vehicle, but this automobile was never produced. In Europe,
electric passenger cars were gone in 1920, in the US they survived for a
decade longer. [Electric
trucks](http://www.notechmagazine.com/2010/05/overview-of-early-electric-trucks-1907-catalog.html),
outside the scope of this article, remained successful for a longer
period.



The manufacturers of early electric cars made several strategic
mistakes. For instance, it took them until 1910 to develop a standard
for the charging of the batteries. But, at the heart of the failure of
the early electric car lay the limited capacity of the storage battery.

Then and now: 100 miles

If today's supporters of EV's would dig into the specifications and the
sales brochures of early 20th century electric "horseless carriages",
their enthusiasm would quickly disappear. Fast-charged batteries (to 80%
capacity in 10 minutes), automated battery swapping stations, public
charging poles, load balancing, the entire business plan of Better
Place, in-wheel motors, regenerative braking: it was all there in the
late 1800s or the early 1900s. It did not help. Most surprisingly,
however, is the seemingly non-existent progress of battery technology.

The [Nissan Leaf](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nissan_Leaf) and the
[Mitsubishi i-MiEV](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/I-MiEV), two electric
cars to be introduced on the market in 2010, have exactly the same range
as the 1908 Fritchle Model A Victoria: 100 miles (160 kilometres) on a
single charge. The "100-mile Fritchle" was a progressive engineering
feat for its time, but it was not the only early electric that boasted a
100 mile range. I have only chosen it because its specifications are
most complete, and because its range was certified.



The first electric cars (1894 - 1900) had a range of 20 to 40 miles (32
to 64 kilometres), still better than the 20 km "range" of a horse. The
average second generation EV (1901 - 1910) already boasted a mileage of
50 to 80 miles (80 to 130 km). The third generation of early electric
cars (1911-1920), including larger vehicles that could seat 5 people
comfortably, could travel 75 to more than 100 miles (120 to more than
160 km) on a single charge - and this is still the range of electric
cars today. (See our [overview on early
electrics](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/overview-of-early-electric-cars.html)
for the specifications of individual vehicles).

100 miles = upper limit

In fact, the range of the Nissan Leaf or the Mitsubishi i-MiEV may be
far worse than that of the 1908 Fritchle. The range of the latter was
(officially) recorded during an 1800 mile (2,900 km) race over a period
of 21 driving days in the winter of 1908. The stock vehicle was driven
in varied weather, terrain and road conditions (often bad and muddy
roads). The average range on a single charge was 90 miles, the maximum
range recorded was 108 miles. (sources:
[1](http://www.ieee.org/organizations/pes/public/2006/nov/peshistory.html)
/ [2](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oliver_Parker_Fritchle) ).

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In fact, the range of the Nissan Leaf or the Mitsubishi i-MiEV may be
far worse than that of the 1908 Fritchle

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The range of the Mitsibushi i-MiEV and the Nissan Leaf was tested in a
very different manner. On rollers instead of on actual roads, and in a
protected environment, but that's not all. Both manufacturers advertise
the US "EPA city" range, a test that supposes a 22 minutes drive cycle
at an average speed of 19.59 mph (31.5 km/h), including one acceleration
to 40 mph (64 km/h) during no more than 100 seconds.

Critics
[blame](http://www.thetruthaboutcars.com/ev-range-high-anxiety-normal-driving-may-cut-range-in-half/)
today's manufacturers for not displaying the "EPA combined cycle" range,
which also includes trips on the motorway (the "EPA highway cycle").
Contrary to vehicles with an internal combustion engine, electric cars
are more fuel efficient in cities than at steady speed on a highway - an
electric motor uses no energy when it is idling, and regenerative
braking works best in city traffic. Darryl Siry, former CMO of Tesla,
estimates that the correct range of the Nissan (and other modern
electric cars) will be [around 70% of the advertised
range](http://www.darrylsiry.com/2009/08/nissans-first-big-mistake-out-of-blocks.html).
That would bring the range of today's electrics to the same level as the
1901 Krieger Electrolette (68 miles).



Even the "EPA combined cycle" figures should be considered as an [upper
limit](http://www.darrylsiry.com/2009/05/problem-with-ev-range-figures.html).
Firstly, with an average speed of 48 mph (77 km/h) the highway tests are
outdated. Secondly, the range of a car is also affected by other
factors: not only excessive speeding and fast accelerations, but also
the use of headlights at night, the use of heating or air-conditioning,
the use of other options onboard, driving over hilly roads or in
headwinds - or all of these factors combined (the EPA has
[added](http://www.fueleconomy.gov/feg/ratings2008.shtml) new test
cycles in 2008 to address these points, but the results are not yet
available for the EV's we are talking about).

Some of these factors not only concern today's electrics, but also those
of yesteryear. However, the Fritchle's range was tested on varied
terrain and in varied weather conditions, which was not the case for the
Nissan or the Mitsubishi. Moreover, early electrics had no
air-conditioning and few had heating systems - drivers and passengers
dressed warm in winter. Mitsubishi warns its clients that the use of the
heater [might cut the range in
half](http://blogs.consumerreports.org/cars/2009/12/behind-the-wheel-mitsubishi-imiev-electric-car.html).
All in all, the range of a 2010 electric vehicle will be closer to 50
miles (80 km) than to 100 miles (160 km). And that's to be expected from
a battery at the beginning of its life - after 5 years, the capacity
will be at least 20 percent less.

Better batteries

In spite of this, the 2010 vehicle has a much better battery under the
hood than the 1908 vehicle. The Fritchle Electric had lead-acid
batteries, like all its contemporaries, with an energy density between
20 and 40 Wh/kg (early 1900 batteries had energy densities of only 10 to
15 Wh/kg). The Nissan and the Mitsubishi have a more powerful
lithium-ion battery with an energy density of around 140 Wh/kg.

The Nissan's battery can thus store 3.5 to 7 times more energy for a
given weight than an average early electric from about 1910. This could
have resulted in a vehicle with a 3.5 to 7 times better range (350 to
700 miles or 560 to 1,130 km), but this is not the case. The
technological improvements could also have been translated into a 3.5 to
7 times lighter (and smaller) battery, and consequently a lighter and
more fuel efficient vehicle, but this is not the case either.

The battery of the Nissan Leaf is only 1.6 times lighter than the
battery of the Fritchle: 220 kg (480 pounds) versus 360 kg (800 pounds).
The Nissan vehicle (including the battery) weighs more than the
Fritchle: 1,271 kg (2,800 pounds) versus 950 kg (2,100 pounds).

Motor output, speed & acceleration

The most obvious difference between the specifications of the old and
new cars is the power of their motors. The 1908 car had a 10 HP motor,
the 2010 car has a 110 HP motor. In other words, the Nissan Leaf has the
motor output of 11 electric Fritchles. The smaller and lighter
Mitsubishi i-MiEV (1,080 kg or 2,400 pounds) has the motor power of 6.5
electric Fritchles.

The maximum speed of the Fritchle was 40 km/h (25 mph), the Nissan does
140 km/h (87 mph) and the i-MiEV is not far behind (130 km/h or 81 mph).
Acceleration data cannot be compared, but there is no doubt that the
2010 cars will accelerate many times faster (and can climb hills much
more easily) than their early 1900 cousins. Today, fast acceleration
times are one of the selling points of EV's.



The risks of more powerful electric motors were already recognized in
the early 1900s. The Hawkins Electrical guide (1914) states:

"Very quick acceleration is an objectionable feature in electric vehicle
design, because a vehicle constructed with this feature puts a heavy
overdraft on the battery".

A few years earlier, members of the Electric Vehicle Association of
America tried to impose a standard maximum speed of 32 km/h (20 mph) for
electric vehicles, because power requirements increased rapidly above
that limit. They feared that higher speeds would threaten the
all-important range of the automobiles. They did not succeed. Too many
manufacturers tried to compete with gasoline cars (and with each other)
by designing faster electric vehicles.

A car [consumes 4 times more fuel to drive twice the
speed]({filename}/posts/speed-energy.md), so it
seems clear that velocity is the reason why the range of today's
electric cars did not improve in spite of better batteries. However, it
is more complicated than that. The "EPA-city" range that the modern EV's
advertise, is based on an average speed of 20 mph or 31 km/h - *below*
the 25 mph top speed of the Fritchle, and almost exactly the same as the
speed at which the vehicle could drive 100 miles on one charge.

While high speeds are definitely a significant factor when considering
the real-world range of today's electric cars, it cannot explain the
disappointing "official" range. Faster acceleration might play a role,
but the EPA-tests described above do not consider aggressive driving
either so there must be other factors at play.

Oversized cars & motors

The first is weight. While the battery of the Nissan is lighter than the
battery of the Fritchle, the Nissan vehicle including the battery is 321
kg (706 pounds) heavier. Without the battery, the Nissan weighs almost
twice as much as the Fritchle: 1,051 kg (2,310 pounds) versus 590 kg
(1,300 pounds).

So while batteries became more than 3 times lighter in 100 years time,
the weight of the vehicle itself (without battery) doubled. The extra
weight of the Nissan already nullifies a significant portion of the
progress: a 35 percent higher mass can lead to a 28 percent reduction in
range (sources:
[1](http://www.worldautosteel.org/WhySteel/Mass-Reduction/Fuel-Efficiency.aspx)
/ [2](http://www.sae.org/technical/papers/2007-01-0343)).



The second factor is directly related to the massive increase in horse
power. Electric motors are (generally) most efficient around 75 percent
of their rated load. Their efficiency drops dramatically below 25
percent. The Fritchle was most efficient at a speed of around 20 mph.
The much more powerful motor of the Nissan Leaf, however, is most
efficient at a speed of around 105 km/h, far above the average speed in
the tests. Today's EV's consume less energy at low speeds than at high
speeds because of other factors, but compared to early electrics with
their much less powerful motor they are probably less efficient at
speeds of around 20 mph.
([source](http://www.p2pays.org/ref/40/39569.pdf) - pdf).

Computers on wheels

The third factor is the electronics. Modern cars have, depending on the
model, 30 to 100 microprocessor-based electronic control units onboard
([source](http://spectrum.ieee.org/green-tech/advanced-cars/this-car-runs-on-code)).
These computers add weight but also consume energy in a direct way. Part
of this direct energy consumption is not included in the EPA-tests -
electronically adjustable windows and mirrors, for example.

However, many other electronics are activated whenever the vehicle is
driving. Examples are power brakes, active suspension, safety sensors,
dashboard instrumentation and the management of the battery itself (not
required for a lead-acid battery but critical for lithium-ion storage
technology). All this electrical energy has to be supplied by the
battery.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The risks of more powerful electric motors were already recognized in
the early 1900s

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

While a higher performance cannot explain the relatively low official
range of today's EV's, all factors described above are at least
partially a consequence of it. Lower speeds would make most
safety-related electronics unnecessary and they would do away with the
need for larger motors and batteries which, just like the electronics,
add more weight.

Tesla Roadster

Some of you might wonder why I don't compare the 1908 Fritchle to the
2008 [Tesla Roadster](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tesla_Roadster). This
car has a range of 244 miles (393 kilometres), 2.44 times better than
the old timer and the modern Japanese cars - and this according to the
"EPA combined cycle", not the "EPA city" figures. (Although the
"EPA-combined" range advertised by Tesla is of course as much suited for
a sports car than the "EPA-city" range is suited for a family vehicle
like the Nissan Leaf ).



The Tesla Roadster is less progressive than it seems, though. The
battery of the sports car weighs twice as much (450 kg) as the battery
of the Nissan (220 kg). Since both batteries have a similar energy
density, you don't have to be a rocket scientist to calculate that the
heavier battery has about twice the capacity: 53 kWh to be exact,
compared to 24 kWh for the Nissan's battery (and 16 kWh for the i-MiEV).
Considering the fact that both cars have a similar weight, a 2.5 better
range for a battery with more than double (2.2 times) the capacity is
far from a revolutionary engineering feat.

Embodied energy of EV batteries

Doubling battery capacity is one way to increase the range of an
electric vehicle (see also the [Mini
E](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mini_E), which sacrifices its rear seat
for a larger battery and gets 104 miles), but this option is far from
sustainable since it also doubles the amount of energy needed to
manufacture the battery. It also doubles the costs, of course. The
battery of the \$ 109,000 Tesla Roadster sells for \$ 30,000, as much as
an entire Nissan or Mitsubishi vehicle.

Nobody has investigated how much energy it takes to produce a Tesla
Roadster battery, or any other EV battery for that matter, but you can
get an idea of it using an [online tool](http://www.eiolca.net/) from
Carnegie Mellon University. Corresponding to these data, \$ 30,000 of
economic activity in the storage battery sector (including the
production of li-ion batteries) equals an energy consumption of 23,222
kWh - that's almost 6 years of electricity consumption by an average
British household. The battery has to be replaced after a maximum of 7
years.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The low "fuel" costs are only half the story if the "fuel tank" itself
is that energy-intensive.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

These figures suggest that the embodied energy of the battery - not
considered in any research paper that investigates the ecological
advantages of electric cars - makes up for a substantial amount of the
total energy cost of an electric automobile. At the advertised energy
use of 21 kWh per 100 miles, 23,222 kWh would take the Tesla 109,938
miles (176,929 km) far. That's almost 30,000 km (18,600 miles) per year,
or 80 km (51 miles) per day. The low "fuel" costs are only half the
story if the "fuel tank" itself is that energy-intensive.

Miracle battery

Today, [just like 100 years
ago](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/overview-of-early-electric-cars.html#100mileroadsters),
EV proponents are divided on the question of how to market electric
vehicles. Some keep emphasizing the fact that most people never drive
further than 30 miles per day - therefore the current batteries are well
suited to perform their task. Most cars will be charged overnight,
[battery-swapping stations and
fast-charging]({filename}/posts/fast-charging-electric-cars-off-peak-grid.md)
will do the rest.



Others, however, keep hoping for a revolutionary storage technology that
will eventually give EV's a similar range to that of gasoline cars. This
belief is supported by press releases like this: "[Nanowire battery can
hold 10 times the charge of
lithium-ion](http://news-service.stanford.edu/news/2008/january9/nanowire-010908.html)".
It is interesting to note that the arrival of such a miracle battery has
been "just around the corner" for over 100 years now:

"A large number of people interested in stored power are looking forward
to a revolution in the generating power of storage batteries, and it is
the opinion of many that the long-looked-for, light weight, high
capacity battery will soon be discovered."
([source](http://www.archive.org/details/horselessvehicl00hiscgoog),
1901).

"The demand for a proper automobile storage battery is so crying that it
soon must result in the appearance of the desired accumulator
\[battery\]. Everywhere in the history of industrial progress, invention
has followed close in the wake of necessity" (Electrical Review, 1901).

Edison himself promised a radical improvement to the lead-acid battery
at the turn of the 20th century. It took almost a decade before the
Edison battery appeared on the market, and even though it had some
advantages over the others, it was very expensive (the price of a
gasoline powered Ford Model-T) and far from revolutionary.

The promise of a miracle storage technology reared its head again in the
1960s and 1970s, when electric cars went through a short revival:

"The consensus among EV proponents and major battery manufacturers is
that a high-energy, high power-density battery - a true breakthrough in
electrochemistry - could be accomplished in just 5 years" (Machine
Design, 1974).

 The range of most electric (concept) cars in the 1960s and 1970s was
considerably *lower* than that of early 1900 electrics. This was because
they were still making use of similar lead-acid batteries, while the
cars themselves were already much heavier and more powerful.

Realistic electric vehicles - scenario 1

The miracle battery might one day arrive, but history teaches us not to
count on it. What would definitely yield results, on the other hand, is
to use existing technology and downsize the car. There are two ways to
do this, as was briefly noted above. The first is to go back to early
20th century electric vehicles and equip them with modern batteries.
This would extend their range spectacularly, as much as a (not yet
existing) nanowire battery could.



If you were to put the lithium-ion battery of the Nissan Leaf in the
1908 Fritchle, the vehicle would have a range of about 644 km (400
miles). If you put a lithium-ion battery with the same weight of the
Fritchle-battery inside, you get about 700 miles (1,127 km) range. Add
to this the fact that we now also have lighter and more efficient motors
(and other vehicle parts) and the range will become even greater.

Even with the headlights and the heating on, driving home over windy
hills and muddy roads, such a car would give a safe and comfortable
range, similar to that of today's gasoline vehicles. Moreover, it would
consume less energy: the Fritchle used around 7 kWh/100 km, the Nissan
Leaf at least 15 kWh/100 km.

A better range is much more than a convenience for the driver. It would
also mean that we need fewer charging and battery swapping stations,
which would [greatly lower the costs and the embodied energy of the
required
infrastructure]({filename}/posts/fast-charging-electric-cars-off-peak-grid.md).
In short, slower EV's would make EV's a whole lot more likely.
Interestingly, we don't even have to streamline them. [Early electrics
had
style](http://www.flickr.com/photos/carphotosbyrichard/sets/72157612523549196/),
and at low speeds aerodynamics is not an important factor in energy
consumption.

Realistic electric vehicles - scenario 2

Of course, slow vehicles with the appearance of a horse carriage will
not appeal to everybody. But there is another way. We could also
downsize the electric car by designing much lighter and fuel efficient
vehicles. This is shown by a concept EV like the
[Trev](http://anz.theoildrum.com/node/6176). This vehicle's performance
is comparable to that of the Nissan Leaf or the Mitsubishi i-MiEV: it
has a top speed of 120 km/h (74.5 mph) and it accelerates from 0 to 100
km/h (60 mph) in less than 10 seconds.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

We cannot have it all: range, speed and size. And yet, that's what we
are trying to do.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

However, its battery is almost 5 times lighter (45 kg or 99 pounds) and
the vehicle itself (including the battery) weighs only 300 kg (660
pounds). In spite of its higher performance, it consumes as much energy
as the Fritchle: 6.2 kWh/100 km, half the fuel consumption of the
Nissan. Yet, the range of the Trev is similar to that of the Nissan or
the Fritchle: 150 km or 93 miles. The reason is of course that if you
design a much lighter vehicle, it will also have a much smaller battery
that consequently holds less energy. With gasoline powered automobiles,
the potential of weight reduction is much larger.

Nevertheless, a vehicle like the Trev would have almost as much benefits
as a Fritchle with a 2010 battery. It would still require an elaborate
charging infrastructure, but because of its much smaller battery it
would seriously relieve the problem of peak demand: fast-charging could
become a realistic option without [the need to build hundreds of new
power
plants]({filename}/posts/fast-charging-electric-cars-off-peak-grid.md).
It would also have the substantial advantage of holding a battery that
is much less energy-intensive to produce.

We cannot have it all



Of course, there are many more possibilities than the two scenario's
outlined here. It would not kill us to drive at speeds of 20 mph, on the
contrary, but there is so much potential in downsizing the automobile
that we don't have to go all the way back to the early 1900s to get a
decent range.

We could tune them up a bit so that they could get 60 km/h or 40 mph
(only sligthly faster than the 1911 [Babcock Electric
Roadster](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/overview-of-early-electric-cars.html#100mileroadsters)
pictured above) and accelerate just fast enough to leave a crime scene
or flee from a mad elephant.

At 60 km/h or 40 mph a trip of 600 kilometres or 400 miles would take 10
hours, instead of 5 hours at a common motorway speed. This does not
sound like the end of the world. It's definitely a whole lot faster than
going by foot (120 hours) or by bike (30 hours). We could also equip the
Trev with a somewhat larger battery so that it gets a better mileage at
the expense of a somewhat lower speed. Or, yet another possibility: keep
the Trev like it is but limit its speed to that of the Fritchle.

If we want more speed, we have to sacrifice range. If we want more
range, we have to sacrifice speed. If we want to keep the (energy) costs
of the charging infrastructure within reasonable limits, we have to
sacrifice speed or size. The lesson to be learned here, is that we
cannot have it all: range, speed and size. And yet, that's what we are
trying to do.

© Kris De Decker (edited by Vincent Grosjean)

[Overview of early electric
cars](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/overview-of-early-electric-cars.html)
: specifications & pictures.

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
   
   
   
   
 ------------------------------------------------------------------------

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Sources (in order of importance):

-   "[Horseless vehicles automobiles motor cycles operated by steam,
    hydro-carbon, electric and pneumatic
    motors](http://www.archive.org/details/horselessvehicle00hiscrich)",
    Gardner Dexter Hiscox, 1901.
-   "[An illustrated directory of the specifications of all domestic and
    foreign motor cars and motor business wagons gasoline, steam, and
    electric sold in this
    country](http://www.archive.org/details/illustrateddescr00newyrich)", 1907.
-   "[The Electric Vehicle and the Burden of
    History](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0813528097?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0813528097)![](http://www.assoc-amazon.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=as2&o=1&a=0813528097){width="1"
    height="1"}", David A. Kirsch, 2000.
-   "[The Electric Vehicle: Technology and Expectations in the
    Automobile
    Age](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0801871387?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0801871387)![](http://www.assoc-amazon.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=as2&o=1&a=0801871387){width="1"
    height="1"}", Gijs Mom, 2004.
-   "[Histoire de la voiture
    électrique](http://philippe.boursin.perso.sfr.fr/velec/velec.htm)",
    Philippe Boursin (website).
-   "[Motor cars; or, power carriages for common
    roads](http://www.archive.org/details/motorcarsorpower00wallrich)",
    Alexander James Wallis-Tayler, 1897. [Chapter on electric
    cars](http://www.archive.org/stream/motorcarsorpower00wallrich#page/154/mode/1up).
-   "[Court histoire de l'automobile électrique
    routière](http://cnum.cnam.fr/CGI/fpage.cgi?BSPI.154/185/100/420/0/0)",
    Bulletin de la Société d'Encouragement pour l'Industrie Nationale,
    July 1940 - June 1941.
-   "[Hawkins Electric Guide: questions, answers & illustrations -
    volume
    9](http://www.archive.org/stream/hawkinselectric01unkngoog#page/n6/mode/2up)",
    Frank D. Graham (1914). [Chapter on electric
    vehicles](http://www.archive.org/stream/hawkinselectric01unkngoog#page/n297/mode/1up).
-   "[Salon de l'Automobile: les petites
    voitures](http://cnum.cnam.fr/CGI/fpage.cgi?4KY28.56/187/100/536/0/0)",
    La Nature, 1901.
-   "[Motor vehicles for business purposes; a practical handbook for
    those interested in the transport of passengers and
    goods](http://www.archive.org/details/motorvehiclesfor00wallrich)",
    A.J. Wallis-Tayler, 1905
-   "[Les voitures
    Electricia](http://cnum.cnam.fr/CGI/fpage.cgi?4KY28.57/43/100/556/0/0)",
    La Nature, 1901
-   "[Electric and Hybrid Cars: A
    History](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B002JMXV1C?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=B002JMXV1C)![](http://www.assoc-amazon.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=as2&o=1&a=B002JMXV1C){width="1"
    height="1"}", Curtis Darrel Anderson & Judy Anderson, 2005
-   "[Tube, train, tram, and car; or up-to-date
    locomotion](http://www.archive.org/details/tubetraintraman04beavgoog)",
    1903
-   "[Alternatives to the gasoline
    automobile](http://www.steamautomobile.com/archivepdf/SAv17n1.CV01.pdf)"
    (.pdf), in "The Steam Automobile", Vol.17, No.1, 1975 .

Related:

-   [How sustainable is stored
    sunlight]({filename}/posts/sustainability-off-grid-solar-power.md)?
-   [Electric
    velomobiles]({filename}/posts/electric-velomobiles.md):
    as fast and comfortable as an automobile, but 80 times more
    efficient
-   [Cargo cyclists replace truck drivers on European city
    streets]({filename}/posts/jobs-of-the-future-cargo-cyclist.md)
-   [Who killed the electric
    grid]({filename}/posts/fast-charging-electric-cars-off-peak-grid.md)?
    Fast-charging & peak demand
-   [Why bicycles are faster than
    cars](http://www.notechmagazine.com/2010/04/the-industrialization-of-traffic-why-bicycles-are-faster-than-cars.html):
    the industrialization of traffic
-   [Bike powered electricity generators are not
    sustainable]({filename}/posts/bike-powered-electricity-generators.md):
    When operating a bicycle generator you are basically pedalling to
    produce the energy required to manufacture the battery.
-   [Woodgas
    vehicles]({filename}/posts/wood-gas-cars.md):
    firewood in the fuel tank

[Main
page](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/)[.](http://www.lowtechmagazine.be/2010/05/actieradius-elektrische-auto.html)

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

  

  

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
