Title: The ugly side of solar panels
Date: 2008-03-03 20:07
Author: Kris De Decker
Category: High-tech Problems
Slug: the-ugly-side-o
Status: published


research shows, albeit unintentional, that generating electricity with
solar panels can also be a very bad idea. In some cases, producing
electricity by solar panels releases more greenhouse gases than
producing electricity by gas or even coal.

  

  

Producing electricity from solar cells reduces air pollutants and
greenhouse gases by about 90 percent in comparison to using conventional
fossil fuel technologies,
[claims](http://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2008/02/080225090826.htm)
a study called "[Emissions from Photovoltaic Life
Cycles](http://pubs.acs.org/doi/full/10.1021/es071763q)", to be
published this month in “Environmental Science & Technology”. Good news,
it seems, until one reads the report itself. The researchers come up
with a solid set of figures. However, they interpret them in a rather
optimistic way. Some recalculations (skip this article if you get
annoyed by numbers) produce striking conclusions.

Solar panels don’t come falling out of the sky – they have to be
manufactured. [Similar to computer
chips]({filename}/posts/embodied-energy-of-digital-technology.md),
this is a dirty and energy-intensive process. First, raw materials have
to be mined: quartz sand for silicon cells, metal ore for thin film
cells. Next, these materials have to be treated, following different
steps (in the case of silicon cells these are purification,
crystallization and wafering). Finally, these upgraded materials have to
be manufactured into solar cells, and assembled into modules. All these
processes produce air pollution and heavy metal emissions, and they
consume energy - which brings about more air pollution, heavy metal
emissions and also greenhouse gases.

Energy mix

The ecological burden of energy use depends on the way electricity was
generated. Therefore, the researchers bring into account 3 scenarios.
One is based on the average European energy mix, another on the average
American energy mix (which is about 45% more CO2-intensive) (Note: in
this article, “CO2” stands for CO2-equivalents which means other
greenhouse gases are included). A third scenario uses the figures of the
recent “CrystalClear” European Commission project, which investigated
the real energy mix used by 11 European and American silicon and PV
module manufacturing factories. Since they use comparatively more gas
and hydropower, this is the best case scenario. The researchers
investigated 4 types of solar cells: multi-crystalline silicon (with an
efficiency of 13%), mono-crystalline silicon (14%), ribbon silicon
(11.5%), and thin-film cadmium telluride (9%).

> "The optimistic conclusions of the researchers are based on a life
> expectancy of 30 years and solar insolation in the Mediterranean"

The scientists come up with figures concerning the amount of greenhouses
gasses emitted per kilowatt-hour of electricity delivered by one square
meter of solar cells. They do that for every type of cell and for the
three different scenarios. Thin film solar cells get the best score with
20.5 grams of CO2 in the European energy mix and 25 grams of CO2 in the
American energy mix. In spite of their lower efficiency, they are more
eco-friendly because they need less material and no aluminium frame. In
spite of their high efficiency, mono-crystalline silicon cells score
worst, with 43 grams of CO2 in the EU, and 55 gram of CO2-equivalent in
the US. All other types and scenarios fit between these two extremes.

Solar insolation

However, these conclusions are dependent on some assumptions, most
importantly solar insolation (the amount of sunlight that the cells
receive) and lifetime expectancy. For solar insolation, the researchers
choose 1,700 kWh per m² per year, which is the average of sunlight in
Southern Europe. For lifetime expectancy, they choose 30 years. From
these variables, they calculate the total lifetime electricity
generation of one square meter of solar cells. Next, they divide the
amount of CO2 emitted for the production of one square meter of solar
panels by this lifetime electricity generation – and that’s how they
achieve their conclusions.

> "Surprisingly, the key data of the calculation (the amount of CO2
> emitted per square meter of solar panels) are nowhere to found in the
> report"

Surprisingly, the key data of the calculation (the amount of CO2 emitted
per square meter of solar panels) are nowhere to found in the report.
That’s remarkable, since these data are the most objective numbers
available. Even so, they can be calculated by multiplying the obtained
results (in gram CO2 emitted per kilowatt-hour of generated electricity)
by the lifetime electricity generation. This calculation gives the
amount of greenhouse gases emitted for the production of one square
meter of solar panels, regardless of the assumptions on solar insolation
and lifetime expectancy.

2 to 20 flights

Once calculated, it's not so suprising that the researchers choose not
to write these figures down. In the best case scenario, one square meter
of solar cells carries a burden of 75 kilograms of CO2. In the worst
case scenario, that becomes 314 kilograms of CO2. With a solar
insolation of 1,700 kWh/m²/yr an average household needs 8 to 10 square
meters of solar panels, with a solar insolation of 900 kWh/m²/yr this
becomes 16 to 20 square meters. Which means that the total CO2 debt of a
solar installation is 600 to 3,140 kilograms of CO2 in sunny places, and
1,200 to 6,280 kilograms of CO2 in less sunny regions. These numbers
equate to 2 to 20 flights Brussels-Lissabon (up and down, per passenger)
- [source CO2 emissions Boeing
747](http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2007/nov/28/asa.advertising).

According to the researchers, producing the same amount of electricity
by fossil fuel generates at least 10 times as much greenhouse gasses.
Checking different sources, this claim is confirmed: 1 kilowatt-hour of
electricity generated by fossil fuels indeed emits 10 times as much CO2
(around 450 grams of CO2 per kWh for gas and 850 for coal). Solar panels
might be far from an ideal solution, but they are definitely a better
choice compared to electricity generated by fossil fuels. At least if we
follow the assumptions chosen by the researchers.

Northward

Logically, if we make the same calculations for a solar insolation of
900 kWh/m² (the yearly average in [Western
Europe](http://re.jrc.ec.europa.eu/pvgis/) and in the [Northeast
and](http://rredc.nrel.gov/solar/old_data/nsrdb/redbook/atlas/)[Northwest
USA](http://rredc.nrel.gov/solar/old_data/nsrdb/redbook/atlas/)), the
results get worse. In the worst case scenario (US grid, mono-crystalline
silicon), emissions rise to 104 gram CO2 per kilowatt-hour of solar
generated electricity, which makes solar panels only 4 times cleaner
than gas. Now let’s play a bit with the life expectancy.

If we combine this lower solar insolation with an expected lifetime of
only 15 years, the worst case scenario becomes 207 grams of CO2 per
kilowatt-hour – just 2 times better than gas. Agreed, this is the worst
case scenario, and even in that case solar panels are still a better
choice than fossil fuels. But it becomes quite hard to describe them as
a “clean” source of fuel.



*This map (click to enlarge) shows the amount of solar energy in hours,
received each day on an optimally tilted surface during the worst month
of the year. For a more detailed view of solar insolation (in kWh/m²/yr)
see the links above.*

<div>

>  "A better strategy would be to use already available solar panels to
> produce more solar panels"

</div>

The life expectancy chosen by the researchers is, well, just an
expectation. It’s true that most manufacturers give warranties of 20 to
25 years, so technologically speaking a life expectancy of 30 years is
not implausible. However, there are other than technological reasons
that may lead to a significantly lower life expectancy. The scientists
note that the environmental score of solar panels will improve, because
they are becoming more efficient each year. (They also become thinner,
so less energy is needed to make them). Most likely they will also
become cheaper.

Life expectancy

That means that in 15 to 20 years time, if the evolution in efficiency
carries on the way it does now, a solar panel with an efficiency of 10
percent produced today will have to compete with cheaper solar panels
that have efficiencies of about 20 percent. Moreover, and that’s a fact
that the researchers are not taking into account, solar cells degrade in
time. Typically, the warranty given by solar cell manufacturers covers
just 80 percent of power output. All this means that it may make sense to substitute older panels with newer panels before
they are 30 years old. Again, even in that case the ecological score
will probably still be better than the one of fossil fuels, but the
point is that the gap can become very small.

For rooftop and ground-base installations, the eco-friendliness can be
good or doubtful, depending on the solar insolation and the life
expectancy. But if we consider solar panels mounted on
[gadgets]({filename}/posts/wind-up-your-la.md)
like laptops or mobile phones, solar energy becomes a plainly bad idea.

If we take a life expectancy of 3 years (already quite optimistic for
most gadgets) and a solar insolation of 900 kWh/m² (quite optimistic
too, since these things are not lying on a roof), the result is 1,038
gram CO2 per kWh in the worst case scenario (high-efficient
mono-crystalline cells produced in the US). That means that it is better
for the environment to power a gadget with electricity generated by, rather than by a solar panel.

Now what?

All this does not mean that PV solar energy should not be promoted. For
one thing, it’s much better using silicon wafers to make energy
generating equipment instead of [energy guzzling
equipment]({filename}/posts/embodied-energy-of-digital-technology.md)
(like [computers](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/computers/), [mobile
phones]({filename}/posts/the-right-to-35.md) and
[car electronics](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/cars/)). But some facts
have to be faced.

First, solar cells are far from a [zero
emission](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/zero_emissions/) technology.
Two: solar panels can be a doubtful choice in less sunny regions. Three:
solar panels mounted on gadgets are completely insane. Four: solar cells
should be recycled. Five: some law or incentive should be introduced to
guarantee a life expectancy of 30 years. And if possible, [solar thermal
power]({filename}/posts/solar-powered-factories.md)
should have priority over solar PV power.

> "All this does not mean that PV solar energy should not be promoted.
> But some facts have to be faced"

It should be realized that solar panels first raise the amount of
greenhouse gasses before they help lowering them. If the world would
embark on a giant deployment of solar energy, the first result would be
massive amounts of extra greenhouse gasses, due to the production of the
cells.

Use solar panels to produce solar panels

A better strategy would be to [use already available solar panels to
produce more solar
panels]({filename}/posts/solar-powered-factories.md).
The scientists calculated that the ecological burden of solar panels can
be halved if 100 percent of energy in the factories would be delivered
by solar energy.

I did not do the calculations for air pollution and heavy metals, but
since these are mainly produced by energy use for production, the
conclusions must be similar.

© Kris De Decker (edited by Vincent Grosjean)

Update April 2015: [How sustainable is PV solar
power]({filename}/posts/how-sustainable-is-pv-solar-power.md)?



Solar photovoltaic (PV) systems and their manufacturing become more
efficient over time, so you would expect that the situation has improved
since 2008. However, things got worse. This is largely due to the
relocation of manufacturing to China, where the electric grid is twice
as carbon-intensive and 50% less energy efficient.

Relocation can also lead to positive results. If we would produce solar
panels in countries with low carbon grids, and install them in countries
with high solar insolation and carbon-intensive grids, the potential of
solar panels would be huge. We have to rethink the way we use and
produce solar energy systems on a global scale. Read more: [How
sustainable is PV solar
power]({filename}/posts/how-sustainable-is-pv-solar-power.md)?

[Slow Electricity: The Return of DC
Power]({filename}/posts/slow-electricity-the-return-of-low-voltage-dc-power.md)?



In today's solar photovoltaic systems, direct current power coming from
solar panels is converted to alternating current power, making it
compatible with a building's electrical distribution.

Because many modern devices operate internally on direct current (DC),
alternating current (AC) electricity is then converted back to DC
electricity by the adapter of each device.

This double energy conversion, which generates up to 30% of energy
losses, can be eliminated if the building's electrical distribution is
converted to DC. Directly coupling DC power sources with DC loads can
result in a significantly cheaper and more sustainable solar system.
However, some important conditions need to be met in order to achieve
this goal.



[How to Get Your Apartment Off the
Grid]({filename}/posts/how-to-go-off-grid-in-your-apartment.md)

The typical solar PV power installation requires lots of energy to
produce it, access to a private roof, and a big budget. However,
wouldn't it be possible to get around these obstacles by installing
small solar panels on window sills and balconies, connected to a
low-voltage direct current (DC) distribution network? To put this theory
to the test, I decided to power Low-tech Magazine's home office in Spain
with solar energy, and write my articles off the grid.

Also:

-   "[Toward a just and sustainable solar energy
    industry](http://www.etoxics.org/site/DocServer/Silicon_Valley_Toxics_Coalition_-_Toward_a_Just_and_Sust.pdf?docID=821)",
    A Silicon Valley Toxics Coalition White Paper (January 14, 2009)
    (pdf, 1.2 mb). An overview of the toxic chemicals used for the
    production of solar panels.
-   "You’re heartsick about global warming, so you’ve just paid \$25,000
    to put a solar system on the roof of your home. How do you respond
    to news that [it was manufactured with a chemical that is 17,000
    times stronger than carbon dioxide as a cause of global
    warming](http://www.e360.yale.edu/content/feature.msp?id=2085)?"

[Main page](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/)
