Title: The Curse of the Modern Office
Date: 2016-11-22 14:17
Author: Kris De Decker
Category: High-tech Problems
Slug: the-curse-of-the-modern-office
Status: published



The information society promises to dematerialise society and make it
more sustainable, but modern office and knowledge work has itself become
a large and rapidly growing consumer of energy and other resources.

![Downtown Chicago]({filename}/images/offices.png)
*Downtown Chicago. Modified from image by Charles Voogd, [Wikipedia
Commons](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_central_business_districts#/media/File:ChicagovanafSearsTower.jpg).*

## Welcome to the Office

These days, it's rather easy to define an "office worker": it's someone
who sits in front of a computer screen for most of the working day,
often in a space where others are doing the same, but sometimes alone in
a "home office" or with a few others in a "shared office". In earlier
times, many office workers were used not for their knowledge or
intelligence, but for the mere objective capacity of their brains to
store and process information. For example, "computers" were office
workers who made endless calculations with the help of mechanical
calculating machines. This category of office workers has become
comparatively less important, because inanimate computers have taken
over many of their jobs. Most office workers&mdash;so-called "knowledge
workers"&mdash;are now paid to actually think and be creative.

There's a big chance that you are one of them. Roughly 70% of those in
employment in industrial nations now have office jobs. The share of
office workers in the total workforce has increased continuously
throughout the twentieth century. For example, in the USA, the
information sector employed 13% of workers in 1900, about 40% of workers
in 1950, and more than 60% of workers in 2000. [^1][^2] The
spectacular and so far unstoppable growth in the number of office
workers is believed to have led to a so-called information society, an
idea popularised by Fritz Machlup in his 1962 book *The Production of
Knowledge in the United States*, and since then repeated by many others.
[^3]

Interestingly, there's no agreement as to what an information society
actually is, but the most widely accepted definition is a society where
more than half of the labour force engages in informational activities
and where more than half of the GNP is generated from informational
goods and services. Some say that the information society is
characterised by the use of modern IT equipment, but that does not
explain the growth of office work during the first half of the twentieth
century. Others have argued that there is a transition from an economy
based on material goods to one based on knowledge. Their claim is that
this shift from the "industrial society" to the "information society"
would make the economy less resource intensive. [^3][^4]

Indeed, unlike workers in manufacturing, service or agricultural
industries, office workers don't really produce anything besides paper
documents, electronic files, and a lot of chatter during formal and
informal meetings. However, the rise of office work has not lowered the
use of resources, on the contrary. For one thing, supporters of the
sustainable information society ignore the fact that we have moved most
of our manufacturing industries (and our waste) to low wage countries.
We are producing and consuming more material goods than ever before, but
the energy use of these activities has vanished from national energy
statistics. Second, modern office work has itself become a large and
rapidly growing consumer of energy and resources.

## The Energy Footprint of Office Work

The energy use of office work consists of multiple components: the
energy use of the building itself (office equipment, heating, cooling
and lighting), the energy used for commuting to and from the office, and
the energy used by the communications networks that office work depends
on. It also includes people who are not working in the office but who
plug in their laptops in a place outside the office, which is also
lighted, heated or cooled. As far as I could find out, nobody has ever
tried to calculate the energy footprint of office work, taking all these
components into account. We know more or less how much energy is used by
commuting and telecommunication, but we don't know how much of that is
due to office work.

Most information is available for the energy use of office buildings --
the icons of today's global knowledge economy. However, even in this
case information is limited because most national statistics do not
distinguish between different types of commercial buildings. The main
exception is the US *Commercial Buildings Energy Consumption Survey*
(CBECS), which is undertaken since 1979 and is the most comprehensive
dataset of its type in the world. It further categorises offices into
administrative or professional offices (such as real estate sales
offices and university administration buildings), government offices
(such as state agencies and city halls), banks and financial offices,
and health service administrative centers. [^5]

<!-- [Moscow International Business
Center](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Moscow_International_Business_Center).
Picture: [Wikipedia
Commons](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:MIBC_12th_June_2014.jpg).
 -->
The modern, American-style office building&mdash;a design increasingly
copied all over the world&mdash;is an insult to sustainability. Per square
metre of floorspace, US office buildings are twice as energy-intensive
as US residential buildings (which are no examples of energy efficiency
either). [^5][^6][^7][^8][^9][^10]

In 2003, the most recent year for which a detailed analysis of office
buildings was presented (published in 2010), there were 824,000 office
buildings in the USA, which consumed 300 trillion Btu of heat and 719
trillion Btu of electricity. [^8] The electricity use alone corresponds
to 210 TWh, which equals a quarter of total US electricity produced by
nuclear power in 2015 (797 Twh with 99 reactors). In other words, the US
needs 25 atomic reactors to power its office buildings. [^11][^12]
From 2003 to 2012, the number of US office buildings grew by more than
20%. [^5]

## How Did we Get Here?

The US office building, which appeared with the arrival of the
Industrial Revolution, was initially quite energy efficient. From the
1880s until the 1930s, sunlight was the principal means of illuminating
the workplace and the most important factor in setting the dimensions
and layout of the standard office building in the US. According to the
NYC-based *Skyscraper Museum*:

<div class="longquote" markdown="1">
"Rentability depended on large windows and high ceilings that allowed
daylight to reach as deeply as possible into the interior. The
distance from exterior windows to the corridor wall was never more
than 28 feet (8.5 m), which was the depth some daylight penetrated.
Ceilings were at least 10 to 12 feet (3 - 3.65 m) in height, and
windows were as big as possible without being too heavy to open,
generally about 4 to 5 feet (1.2 - 1.5 m) wide and 6 to 8 feet (1.8 -
2.4 m) high. If the office was subdivided, partitions were made of
translucent glass to transmit light." [^13]
</div>
Many office buildings had window accomodating H-, T-, and L-shaped
footprints to encourage natural lighting, ventilation, and cooling. This
changed after the introduction of fluorescent light bulbs and air
conditioning. Produced at an affordable price in the late 1930s,
fluorescent lighting provided high levels of illumination without
excessive heat and cost. The first fully air-conditioned American office
buildings appeared around the 1930s. The combination of artificial
lighting and air-conditioning made it possible to design office space
much deeper than the old standard of 28 feet. Light courts and high
ceilings were ditched, and office buildings were reconceived as massive
cubes&mdash;which were much cheaper to build and which maximised floor
space. [^13][^14]

Air-conditioning also enabled the most characteristic feature of the
modern office building: its glazed façade. From the 1950s onwards, under
the influence of Modernist architecture, glass came to dominate in
America&mdash;early examples of this trend are the Lever Building (1952)
and the Seagram building (1958). The US Modernist office building, a
cube with a steel skeleton and glass curtain walls, is essentially a
massive [greenhouse]({filename}/posts/reinventing-the-greenhouse.md)
that would be unbearable for most of the year without artificial
cooling. Because glazed façades don't insulate well, energy use for
heating is also high. In spite of all the glass, most US office
buildings require artificial lighting throughout the day because many
office workers are too far from a window to receive enough natural
light.

<!-- Canary Wharf, London. Photo credit: [David Iliff, Wikipedia
Commons](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Canary_Wharf_Skyline_2,_London_UK_-_Oct_2012.jpg).
 -->
The [arrival of electric office equipment from the 1950s
onwards]({filename}/posts/why-the-office-needs-a-typewriter-revolution.md)
further increased energy use. According to the CEBECS survey, "more
computers, dedicated servers, printers, and photocopiers were used in
office buildings than in any other type of commercial building".
According to the latest analysis, concerning the year 2003, American
office buildings were using 27.6 million computers, 11.6 million
printers, 2.1 million photocopiers, and 2.5 million dedicated servers.
In addition to electricity consumed directly, this electronic equipment
requires additional cooling, humidity control, and/or ventilation that
also increase energy use. [^5][^8]

While heating was the main energy use in pre-1950s office buildings,
today cooling, lighting and electronic equipment (all operated by
electricity), use 70% of all energy on-site. Note that this ratio
doesn't include the energy that is lost during the generation and
distribution of electricity. Depending on how electricity is produced,
energy use at the source can be up to three times higher than on-site.
Assuming thermal generation of electricity (coal or natural gas), the
average US office building consumes up to twice as much energy for
electricity than for heating.

## Cultural Differences

Technology alone, however, does not explain the rise of the typical
air-conditioned office building, nor its high energy use today. Although
fluorescent light bulbs and air conditioning soon became available in
Europe, the all-glass, cube-like office building remained for a long
time a uniquely North American phenomenon. In the 1920s, office work in
the USA came under the influence of Frederick Taylor's 'Scientific
Managament'. Time and motion studies, which had been carried out in
factories since the 1880s, were now applied to office work as well. Men
with stopwatches recorded the actions of (mostly female) employees with
the aim of improving labour productivity.

Taylor's ideas were translated into office design through the concept of
large, open floor spaces with an orderly arrangement of desks, all
facing the direction of the supervisor. Private office rooms were
abolished. By the late 1940s, American offices resembled factories in
their appearance and methods. Although Taylorism left its mark on
European offices, it was taken up with less enthusiasm and faced more
resistance rooted in tradition than in the US. In the 1960s and 1970s,
the Europeans rejected the application of Taylorist principles to office
work more strongly, and developed their own type of office building.
British office expert Frank Duffy calls it the "social democratic"
office. [^15][^16]

<!-- 
La Défense, Paris. Wikipedia Commons.
 -->

These buildings, "groundscrapers" rather than "skyscrapers", were
designed like small cities, cut into separate "houses" that are united
by internal "streets" or "squares". They were built with corridors and
spacious rooms on either side, all naturally lit and ventilated, with
employees working next to a window. The social democratic office
building focuses on user comfort, a consequence of the fact that office
workers in Europe, unlike those in the USA, obtained the right to form
democratically elected workers' councils that could participate in
organisational decision making. The UK, with its more American style of
business, embraced the US approach in the 1980s.[^15][^16]

An important difference between the "social democratic" office building
and the "Taylorist" US/UK office building is that the first is usually
owner-occupied, while the latter is generally a speculative building: It
is built or refurbished to provide a return on investment, and rented by
the room or floor. The speculative model is gaining ground: over the
last two decades, US/UK-style office buildings have finally started
spreading all over Europe, and beyond. Roughly 50% of new office
buildings under construction in France and Germany&mdash;the largest
European markets outside the UK&mdash;are now speculative buildings,
roughly double their share in the 1980s. [^15][^18]

This is bad news, because speculative office buildings exclude lower
energy alternatives and raise energy use. First, in order to maximise
the return on investment, they are usually designed as square or
rectangular buildings with deep floor plans and low ceilings, and built
as high as planning regimes allow. Naturally lit and cooled buildings
require a more horizontal build and higher ceilings, both aspects that
conflict with maximising floorspace. Second, those who design
speculative office buildings don't know who will occupy the finished
spaces, which leads to an over-provision of services.

"Developers and letting agents focus on the 'needs' of the most
demanding tenants, and hence what is required for an office to be
marketable to *any* tenant", write the authors of a recent study that
looks into the energy demand of UK office buildings&mdash;and concludes
that 92% of such buildings are over-provisioned. Lighting, cooling and
heating systems are attuned to unrealistic occupancy rates and are
consequently producing more light, heat and cold than is necessary.
[^19][^20]

## The Promise of Remote Working

If the high energy use of office work is questioned at all, it's usually
followed by the proposal to work *outside* the office building. At least
since the 1980s, home working has been touted as a trend with potential
environmental benefits. Alvin Toffler's *The* *Third Wave* (1980)
predicted that in the near future it would no longer be necessary to
build offices because computers would enable people to work anywhere
they wanted. In 1984, when personal computers had become common
equipment in offices, Frank Duffy stated that "many office buildings
quite suddenly are becoming obsolete". [^15]

<!-- Financial District, Downtown Toronto. Paul Dex, [Wikipedia
Commons](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Central_business_district#/media/File:Financial_District,_Toronto.jpg).
 -->
Obviously, no such thing happened: in spite of the personal computer,
there are now more office buildings than ever before. However, the
utopian vision of a radically changed work environment is still among
us. Since the arrival of mobile phones, portable computers and the
internet in the 1990s, the focus has shifted to "remote" or "agile"
working, which includes working at home but also on the road and in
so-called third places: coffeeshops, libraries or co-working offices.
[^20] These concepts suggest that offices will become meeting places
for 'nomadic' employees equipped with mobile phones and laptops, how the
office will become a more diverse and informal environment, or how in
the near future offices may no longer be necessary because we can work
anywhere and at any time. [^15] According to a 2014 consultancy report:

<div class="longquote" markdown="1">
"The term 'office' will become obsolete in the coming years. The
modern workplace evolves into more of a shared workspace with flexible
working arrangements that acts as more of a hub for workers on the go
than an official place of work. The vast majority of jobs in most
organisations can be accomplished from virtually any PC or mobile
device, from just about anywhere". [^21]
</div>

Frank Duffy, building further upon his 1980s predictions, writes in (2008):

<div class="longquote" markdown="1">
"The development of the knowledge economy and achievement of
sustainability will both be made possible by the power of information
technology... Office work can be carried out anywhere... In the
knowledge economy more and more businesses, both large and small, will
be operated as networks, depending at least as much on virtual
communications as on face-to-face interactions. Networked
organisations do not need to operate, manage or define themselves
within conventional categories of workplaces or conventional working
hours." [^16]
</div>

## Does it Matter Where We Work?

On the face of it, more people working outside the office has obvious
potential for energy savings. Home workers don't have to travel to and
from the office, which can save energy&mdash;after all, commuting has become energy-intensive since the democratisation of the car in
the 1950s. Furthermore, home office workers tend to use less energy for
heating, cooling and lighting than they do in the office, a finding that
corresponds with the fact that office buildings consume double the
energy per square metre of floorspace compared to residential homes.
[^22]

However, there are many ways in which the environmental advantages of
remote working can disappear or become disadvantages. First, remote
workers make use of the same [office
equipment]({filename}/posts/why-the-office-needs-a-typewriter-revolution.md),
the same data centers and the same [internet and phone
infrastructure]({filename}/posts/can-the-internet-run-on-renewable-energy.md)
as people working in an office&mdash;and these are now the main drivers
behind the increasing energy use of office buildings. In fact, a
networked office would surely increase energy use by communication
services, because face-to-face meetings at the office are replaced and
complemented by virtual meetings and other forms of electronic
communication.

In *Work and the City*, Frank Duffy recalls his participation in a
videoconferencing talk, expressing his awe for the quality of the
experience. What he doesn't seem to realise, is that the Cisco
Telepresence system that he was using requires between 1 and 3 kW of
power (and 200W in standby) at either side [^25], plus the energy use
of routing and switching all those data through the network
infrastructure.

<!-- Frankfurt, Germany. Source: Wikipedia Commons.
 -->
Second, if work is done not at home but in third places, people might
actually increase their energy use for transport when they visit
different working spaces during the day. They might work from home in
the morning and drive to the office in the afternoon, or they might go
to the office in morning and to a co-working space later in the day.
Likewise, if organisations shorten the distance between the office and
the office worker by inviting them to work in shared spaces closer to
their home, employees might actually decide to go live further away from
their new working space, and keep the same time budget for commuting.
[^20]

Third, for an employee working at home, on the road, or in a third
place, the heating, cooling and lighting of that alternative workspace
is now often an extra load because his or her now empty space in the
office is still being heated, cooled and lit. In most cases, today's
home and remote workers occasion additional energy consumption. [^22]
This problem is recognised by the supporters of remote working, who
stress that office buildings have to adapt to the new reality of the
networked office by reducing floorspace and increasing the occupancy
rates. This can happen through "hot-desking", sharing a smaller amount
of desks between office workers who decide not to work at home&mdash;and
hope that not everybody will show up at the same time.

Noel Cass, who investigates energy demand in offices for the UK's at Lancaster University, has his doubts about this
approach:

<div class="longquote" markdown="1">
"Hot-desking" requires the depersonalisation of the desk, as if it was
a coffee bar or a library, and that's easier said than done. Internet
companies such as Google and Yahoo, who pioneered hot-desking
arrangements and whose productivity is the rationale behind this
trend, have gone back to giving each employee their personal space. In
fact, these companies not only left behind the "non-territorial"
office, they also have recognised that productivity is best secured by
physical co-presence, discouraging telecommuting.

Office spaces now tend to be conceptualised as a 'destination' with
increasing amenities on the job, in an effort to attract and retain
talent and encourage them to spend more time there. Examples are
domestic-like interiors, gym facilities, indoor swimming pools, dry
cleaners, or dentists on site. So, who knows, instead of working at
home, the future could be living at the office. Obviously, increasing
amenities at the office might negate the energy savings obtained by
fewer and shared office desks. [^20]
</div>

In sum, office work will always include buildings, commuting, office
equipment and a communication infrastructure. The focus on the location
of office work&mdash;at home, in the office, or elsewhere&mdash;conceals the
real cause that impacts energy use: the high energy use of all its
components.

<!-- Lujiazui, Shanghai. Patrick Fischer, [Wikipedia
Commons](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_central_business_districts#/media/File:2012_Pudong.jpg).
 -->
If the commute happens, or could happen, by walking, biking, or taking a
commuter train, instead of by car, the energy use advantage of working
at home would be zero or insignificant. Similarly, if an office building
is designed in such a way that it can be naturally lit and cooled, like
in the old days, working from home would not save energy for cooling and
lighting. Finally, the use of [low energy office
equipment]({filename}/posts/why-the-office-needs-a-typewriter-revolution.md)
and a [low energy internet
infrastructure]({filename}/posts/how-to-build-a-low-tech-internet.md)
would lower the energy use regardless of where people are working. In
short, for energy use it doesn't matter so much where office work
happens. What really matters is what happens at these places and in
between them.

## How Much Office Work Do We Need?

In his 1986 book *The Control Revolution*, James Beniger states that
there is a tight relationship between the volume and speed of energy
conversion and material processing in an industrial system on the one
hand, and the importance of bureaucratic organisation and information
processing, in other words, office work, on the other hand:

<div class="longquote" markdown="1">
Innovation in matter and energy processing create the need for further
innovation in information processing and communication&mdash;an increased
need for control. Until the nineteenth century, the extraction of
resources, even in the largest and most developed national economies,
were still carried out with processing speeds enhanced only slightly
by draft animals and wind and water power.

So long as the energy used to process and move material throughputs
did not much exceed that of human labour, individual workers could
provide the information processing required for its control. The
Industrial Revolution sped up society's entire material processing
system, thereby precipitating a crisis of control.

As the crisis in control spread through the material economy, it
inspired a continuing stream of innovations in control technology&mdash;a
steady development of organisational, information-processing, and
communication technology that lags industrialisation by perhaps 10 to
20 years. By the 1930s, the crisis of control had been largely
contained. [^1]
</div>

Although Beniger makes no reference whatsoever to sustainability issues,
what he suggests here is another strategy to lower the energy use of
office work: reduce the demand for it. If office work depends on the
material and energy throughput in the industrial system, it follows that
reducing this throughput will lower the need for office work. A slower,
low energy, and more low-tech industrial system would decrease the need
for control and thus for office work. An economy with smaller
organisations operating more locally, would need less office work.

<!-- 
Cuatro Torres Business Area, Madrid. Xauxa Hakan Svensson, [Wikipedia
Commons](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_central_business_districts#/media/File:Madrid_Cuatro_Torres_Business_Area02.jpg).
 -->

By the 1900s, all management techniques and office tools that would be
used for the next 70 years had been invented. James Beniger was not
impressed by the arrival of the digital computer, which was becoming
ubiquitous in offices when he wrote his book:

<div class="longquote" markdown="1">
Contrary to prevailing views, which locate the origins of the
information society in WWII or in the commercial development of
television or computers, the basic societal transformation from
industrial to information society had been essentially completed by
the late 1930s.

Microprocessing and computer technology, contrary to currently
fashionable opinion, do not represent a new force recently unleashed
on an unprepared society but merely the most recent installment in the
continuing development of the control revolution.

Energy utilisation, processing speeds, and control technologies have
continued to co-evolve in a positive spiral, advances in any one
factor causing, or at least enabling, improvements in the other two.
Furthermore, information processes and flows need themselves to be
controlled, so that informational technologies must continue to be
applied at higher and higher layers of control&mdash;certainly an ironic
twist to the control revolution. [^1]
</div>

Our so-called information economy mainly serves to manage an ever
faster, larger and more complex production and consumption system, of
which we have only outsourced the manufacturing part. Consequently,
without the information economy&mdash;without the office&mdash;the industrial
system would collape. Without the industrial system, there would be no
need for the information society or the office&mdash;in fact, office work
could be like it was before 1850, when the biggest bank in the US was
run by just three people with a quill. [^1]

The sustainable image of the information society&mdash;as contrasted to the
dirty image of the industrial society&mdash;is built on an obsession with
dividing energy use into different statistical categories, fiddling
around with figures on electronic calculating tools. In other words,
it's a product of office work, hiding the true nature of office work.

*This article was written for [The Demand
Centre](http://www.demand.ac.uk/), one of six academic research centres
funded by the Research Councils UK to address "End Use Energy Demand
Reduction". This article is a shortened version of the [original
piece](http://www.demand.ac.uk/22/11/2016/the-curse-of-the-modern-office/),
which is on Demand's website. The Demand Centre focuses on the use of
energy as part of accomplishing social practices at home, at work and in
moving around. It investigates how energy demand is shaped by material
infrastructures and institutional arrangements, and how these systems
reproduce interpretations of normal and acceptable ways of life.*


### Related Articles:

-   [Why the Office Needs a Typewriter
    Revolution]({filename}/posts/why-the-office-needs-a-typewriter-revolution.md)
-   [How to Get your Apartment Off the
    Grid]({filename}/posts/how-to-go-off-grid-in-your-apartment.md)
-   [Slow Electricity: The Return of DC
    Power]({filename}/posts/slow-electricity-the-return-of-low-voltage-dc-power.md)?
-   [How to Build a Low-tech
    Internet]({filename}/posts/how-to-build-a-low-tech-internet.md)
-   [Why we Need a Speed Limit for the
    Internet]({filename}/posts/can-the-internet-run-on-renewable-energy.md)
-   [The Revenge of the Circulating
    Fan]({filename}/posts/circulating-fans-air-conditioning.md)

Sources:

[^1]: *[The Control Revolution: Technological and Economic Origins of
the Information
Society](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B0073C86LS/ref=as_li_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=B0073C86LS&linkCode=%7B%7BlinkCode%7D%7D&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkId=%7B%7Blink_id%7D%7D)![](//ir-na.amazon-adsystem.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=am2&o=1&a=B0073C86LS)*, James Beniger, 1986.

[^2]: *[The Growth of Information Workers in the US
Economy](https://ideas.repec.org/a/taf/ecsysr/v18y2006i3p221-255.html),*
Edward N. Wolff, in "Communications of the ACM, October 2005/Vol.48,
No.10, 2005.

[^3]: *[Theories of the Information Society (Third
Edition)](https://cryptome.org/2013/01/aaron-swartz/Information-Society-Theories.pdf),*
PDF, Frank Webster, 2006.

[^4]: *[Sustainability and the Information
Society](http://fuchs.uti.at/wp-content/uploads/infogestechn/HCC7_Fuchs.pdf)*
\[PDF\], Christian Fuchs, IFIP International Conference on Human Choice
and Computers, 2006.

[^5]: *[2012 Commercial Buildings Energy Consumption Survey
(CBECS)](http://www.eia.gov/consumption/commercial/)*, U.S. Energy
Information Administration.

[^6]: *[A review on Buildings Energy Consumption
Information](http://www.esi2.us.es/~jfc/Descargas/ARTICULOS/PAPER_LPL_1_OFF-PRINT.pdf)*
\[PDF\], Luis Pérez-Lombard, José ortiz, Christine Pout. In "Energy and
Buildings 40 (2008), pp.394-398.

[^7]: *[Power Density: A Key to Understanding Energy Sources and Uses
(MIT
Press)](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0262529734/ref=as_li_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0262529734&linkCode=%7B%7BlinkCode%7D%7D&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkId=%7B%7Blink_id%7D%7D)![](//ir-na.amazon-adsystem.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=am2&o=1&a=0262529734),* Vaclav Smil, 2015.

[^8]: *[Office
Buildings](http://wnew.www.eia.gov/consumption/commercial/data/archive/cbecs/cbecs2003/officereport/office1.html)*,
CBECS, 2010.

[^9]: *[BSD-152: Building Energy Performance
Metrics](https://buildingscience.com/documents/digests/bsd152-building-energy-performance-metrics)*.
Building Science Corporation, 2010.

[^10]: *[U.S. Energy Use Intensity by Property Type, Technical
Reference](https://portfoliomanager.energystar.gov/pdf/reference/US%20National%20Median%20Table.pdf)*
\[PDF\]. Energy Star, 2016.

[^11]: *[US Nuclear Power
Plants](http://www.nei.org/Knowledge-Center/Nuclear-Statistics/US-Nuclear-Power-Plants)*,
Nuclear Energy Institute.

[^12]: *[A Look at the US Commercial Building Stock: Results from EIA's
2012 Commercial Buildings Energy Consumption Survey
(CEBECS)](https://www.eia.gov/consumption/commercial/reports/2012/buildstock/)*.
US Energy Information Administration, 2015.

[^13]: *[Downtown New York: The Architecture of Business / The Business
of
Buildings](http://skyscraper.org/EXHIBITIONS/DOWNTOWN_NEW_YORK/CONTENT/dny_01.htm)*.
Virtual Exhibition. The Skyscraper Museum.

[^14]: *[Losing Our Cool: Uncomfortable Truths About Our Air-Conditioned
World (and Finding New Ways to Get Through the
Summer)](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/1595587756/ref=as_li_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=1595587756&linkCode=%7B%7BlinkCode%7D%7D&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkId=%7B%7Blink_id%7D%7D)![](//ir-na.amazon-adsystem.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=am2&o=1&a=1595587756),* Stan Cox, 2010.

[^15]: *[The European Office: Office Design and National
Context](http://repository.tudelft.nl/islandora/object/uuid%3A8718d3a3-f679-4b4a-9e1a-40165c59ca4c),*
Juriaan van Meel, 2000.

[^16]: *[Work and the City (Edge
Futures)](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/1906155127/ref=as_li_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=1906155127&linkCode=%7B%7BlinkCode%7D%7D&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkId=%7B%7Blink_id%7D%7D)![](//ir-na.amazon-adsystem.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=am2&o=1&a=1906155127),* Frank Duffy, 2008.

[^17]: *[White Collar: The American Middle
Classes](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0195157087/ref=as_li_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0195157087&linkCode=%7B%7BlinkCode%7D%7D&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkId=%7B%7Blink_id%7D%7D)![](//ir-na.amazon-adsystem.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=am2&o=1&a=0195157087)*. C. Wright Mills, 1951.

[^18]: *[Office Buildings Go Up on Mere
Speculation](http://www.wsj.com/articles/office-buildings-go-up-on-mere-speculation-1412709271)*,
Alessio Pirolo, The Wall Street Journal, October 7, 2014.

[^19]: [*Standards, Design and Energy Demand: The Case of Commercial
Offices*](http://www.demand.ac.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/03/DEMAND2016_Full_paper_8-Faulconbridge.pdf).
James Faulconbridge & Noel Cass, 2016. Paper prepared for DEMAND Centre
Conference, Lancaster, 13-15 April 2016.

[^20]: Papers in preparation, [Noel
Cass](http://www.lancaster.ac.uk/people-profiles/noel-cass), The Demand
Centre, Lancaster University, UK.

[^21]: *[Study: The Traditional Office Will Soon be
Extinct](http://www.pcworld.com/article/2364272/study-the-traditional-office-will-soon-be-extinct.html)*.
PC World, Tony Bradley, June 17, 2014.

[^22]: [*The Practice of Working from Home and the Place of
Energy*](http://www.demand.ac.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/03/DEMAND2016_Full_paper_33-Hampton.pdf)
\[PDF\], Sam Hampton. Paper prepared for DEMAND Centre Conference,
Lancaster, 13-15 April, 2016.

[^23]: *[Characteristics of Home Workers,
2014](http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20160105160709/http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/dcp171776_365592.pdf)*
\[PDF\]. Office for National Statistics, June 2014.

[^24]: *[Four million people are now homeworkers but more want to join
them](https://www.tuc.org.uk/workplace-issues/work-life-balance/four-million-people-are-now-homeworkers)*.
TUC, June 5, 2015.

[^25]: *[Immersive
TelePresence](http://www.cisco.com/c/en/us/products/collaboration-endpoints/immersive-telePresence/index.html)*.
Cisco.
