Title: Well-Tended Fires Outperform Modern Cooking Stoves
Date: 2014-06-23 12:04
Author: Kris De Decker
Category: High-tech Problems
Slug: thermal-efficiency-cooking-stoves
Status: published



Despite technological advancements since the Industrial Revolution,
cooking remains a spectacularly inefficient process. This holds true for
poor and rich countries alike. While modern gas and electric cooking
stoves might be more practical and produce less indoor pollution than
the open fires and crude stoves used in developing countries, they are
equally energy inefficient.

In fact, an electric cooking stove is only half as efficient as a
well-tended open fire, while a gas hob is only half as effective as a
biomass rocket stove. And even though indoor air pollution is less of an
issue with modern cooking stoves, research indicates that pollution
levels in western kitchens can be surprisingly high.

Image: a typical three-stone fire. Source: [Global Alliance for Clean
Cookstoves](http://www.cleancookstoves.org/).

Present-day cooking methods in poorer countries are quite well
documented, as they are one of the main concerns of NGOs which promote
appropriate technological development. An estimated 2.5 to 3 billion
people still cook their food over open fires or in rudimentary
cookstoves, and these numbers keep increasing due to population growth.

The most basic and widely used type of cooking device is the
wood-fuelled "three-stone fire", which is made by arranging three stones
to make a stand for a cooking pot. Alongside the three-stone fire --
which dates back to Neolithic times&mdash;many types of home-made cooking
stoves can be found. They are powered by burning coal or biomass, be it
wood, crop residues, dung or charcoal.
\[[1](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/06/thermal-efficiency-cooking-stoves.html#notes)\]



Indoor cooking in poor countries. Image: Source: [Global Alliance for
Clean Cookstoves](http://www.cleancookstoves.org/).

The main concern with the use of crude biomass cooking stoves is their
destructive influence on human welfare and natural resources. When used
indoors, biomass cooking stoves lead to severe health issues such as
chronic lung diseases, acute respiratory infections, cataracts,
blindness, and adverse effects on pregnancy. The main victims are women,
who do most of the housework, and young children, who are often carried
on the mother's back while she is cooking.

Inefficient biomass stoves also force people (again, most often women)
to spend much of their time collecting fuel. The environmental
degradation caused by biomass stoves is equally problematic. When wood
is used as a primary fuel, inefficient cooking methods lead to
large-scale deforestation, soil erosion, desertification and emissions
of greenhouse gases. For coal-fuelled stoves, the main issue is indoor
air pollution.

The Thermal Efficiency of a Three-stone Fire

At the heart of the problem lies the low thermal efficiency of
traditional cooking methods. For three-stone fires, thermal efficiency
is stated to be as low as 10 to 15%.
\[[1](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/06/thermal-efficiency-cooking-stoves.html#notes)\]\[[2](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/06/thermal-efficiency-cooking-stoves.html#notes)\]
In other words: 85 to 90% of the energy content in the wood is lost as
heat to the environment outside the cooking pot. Obviously, this low
efficiency wastes natural resources, but it also boosts air pollution
and greenhouse gas emissions because the relatively low temperature of
the fire leads to incomplete combustion.

> Well-constructed three-stone fires protected from wind and tended with
> care score between 20 and 30% thermal efficiency



An improved three-stone fire. Picture: [Chef Cooke @
Flickr](https://www.flickr.com/photos/chefcooke/4345695767/sizes/o/in/photolist-7C1PX6-7C5D4J-aGsrr6-7zSGiP-bpamkp-bpajBr-bpai9V-bpakf2-bpamXx-bpaiX4-2gh2vv-4nosr-aPBDzg-aPBuCD-aPBuYi-aPBvz2-aPBwzM/).

However, the issue is more complicated than it is usually presented. To
begin with, the productivity and cleanliness of an open fire (and
similar crude cooking stoves) greatly depends on the circumstances in
which they are used and on the skills of the cook. In its test of 18
cooking stove designs from all over the world, the Partnership for Clean
Indoor Air (PCIA)
\[[3](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/06/thermal-efficiency-cooking-stoves.html#notes)\]\[[4](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/06/thermal-efficiency-cooking-stoves.html#notes)\]
concluded that:

"Well-constructed three-stone fires protected from wind and tended with
care scored between 20 and 30% thermal efficiency. Open fires made with
moister wood and operated with less attention to the wind can score as
low as 5%. The operator and the conditions of use largely determine the
effectiveness of operation. If the sticks of wood are burnt at the tips
and pushed into the center as the wood is consumed, the fire can be hot
and relatively clean burning."

Due to the influence of environmental factors such as wind, an indoor
three-stone fire is generally more efficient than one operated outside.
However, outdoor open fires can also be made more efficient by placing
them in a hole in the ground or by shielding them with the use of
earthen walls, which also adds thermal mass. Furthermore, PCIA remarks
that "it is important to recognize that the open hearth and resulting
smoke often have considerable cultural and practical value in the home,
including control of insects".

The Thermal Efficiency of Improved Biomass Stoves

Especially since the 1970s and 1980s, many international NGO's have
tried to improve cooking traditions in poorer countries. This has
resulted in a large number of so-called "improved cooking stoves", which
again vary in terms of design, performance and costs. Hundreds of
variations exist.
\[[1](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/06/thermal-efficiency-cooking-stoves.html#notes)\]\[[4](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/06/thermal-efficiency-cooking-stoves.html#notes)\]



A collection of improved biomass stoves. Source: [Global Alliance for
Clean Cookstoves](http://www.cleancookstoves.org/).

Some of these designs are exclusively aimed at minimising air pollution
at the cost of higher fuel consumption, while other designs achieve a
higher efficiency but increase air pollution.
\[[4](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/06/thermal-efficiency-cooking-stoves.html#notes)\]
In this article, we will focus exclusively on cooking stoves that
address both issues simultaneously. This is not to suggest that other
designs can't be preferable in certain circumstances. For example,
because biomass cooking stoves do not present direct health problems
when used outdoors, saving fuel would be the most important aim in that
context.

Compared to a basic three-stone fire with 10-15% thermal efficiency,
improved cooking stoves can easily halve the fuel requirements of the
cooking process. This can be achieved by providing an insulated
combustion chamber, improving the air supply, and other measures.



In a laboratory comparison of five major types of biomass cooking
stoves, it was found that an improved rocket stove uses 2,470 kJ to boil
one litre of water and then simmer it for 30 minutes, while a basic
three-stone fire requires 6,553 kJ to fulfill the same task (see the
dark blue bars in the graphic above).
\[[5](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/06/thermal-efficiency-cooking-stoves.html#notes)\]\[[1](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/06/thermal-efficiency-cooking-stoves.html#notes)\]
The rocket stove thus uses 60% less fuel than the three-stone fire.
Furthermore, the rocket stove boils 2.5 litres of water more than 5
minutes faster (see the light blue points in the graphic above).

> A rocket stove can double the thermal efficiency of a well-tended open
> fire

The values are the average of three tests and measure specific energy
consumption instead of thermal efficiency. Both test methods have their
shortcomings&mdash;measuring the efficiency of cooking is suprisingly
complex&mdash;so by applying both methods the accuracy of an experiment
increases.
\[[6](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/06/thermal-efficiency-cooking-stoves.html#notes)\]
This was done by the Partnership for Clean Indoor Air, which compared
the thermal efficiency and specific energy consumption of 18 cookstove
designs, including a well tended open fire with a thermal efficiency of
20-30%.
\[[4](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/06/thermal-efficiency-cooking-stoves.html#notes)\]



In this study, one of the best performing improved biomass stoves&mdash;a
20 liter can rocket stove (image at the right)&mdash;convincingly beats the
efficiency of the well-tended open fire. It requires 733 grams of wood
(12,579 kJ) to bring five litres of water to boil and simmer for 45
minutes, only 65% of the 1,112 grams of wood (19,496 kJ) required by the
well-tended open fire. The thermal efficiency of the rocket stove varies
between 23 and 54%.
\[[7](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/06/thermal-efficiency-cooking-stoves.html#notes)\]

The rocket stove also lowers air pollution: the emissions are only 26%
of the carbon monoxide (CO) and 60% of the particulate matter (PM)
produced by the well-tended open fire. Lastly, it shortens cooking time
to 22 minutes for five litres of water, compared to 27 minutes for the
open fire.

The top performing biomass stove in the test is a wood gas stove, with
slightly more than one-third the wood consumption (459 grams of wood or
9,434 kJ) and 15-20% of the pollution levels of the three-stone fire. It
has a thermal efficiency of 44-46%. However, it requires an electric fan
to improve combustion efficiency, while all others are natural-draft
stoves.

Cooking in Wealthy Households

There is great irony in the fact that the improved biomass stoves
mentioned above are much more efficient than modern cooking stoves used
in the western world and in wealthier households of developing nations.
In fact, most modern cooking stoves have a thermal efficiency that is on
par with that of a three-stone fire.

The western world switched from open fires to closed cookstoves from the
eighteenth century. Initially, these "kitchen stoves" were used for both
heating and cooking, and were powered by coal, charcoal or biomass. When
central heating systems were introduced in the early twentieth century,
the kitchen stove was replaced by a stand-alone cooking appliance,
powered by gas or electricity.

> Improved biomass stoves have double or triple the thermal efficiency
> of modern electric or gas cooking stoves

Conventional electric hobs use attached iron plates as their heating
units, while more sophisticated models use infrared, halogen or
induction units, which are positioned below glass ceramics. Of these,
only induction-based cooking plates are more efficient than conventional
electric hobs. The others mainly offer increased convenience, such as
greater ease when cleaning. Most gas cooking stoves place burners on top
of a stainless steel or ceramic surface, while others place them on top
or beneath a glass ceramic surface. Again, the latter offers increased
convenience, but no significant efficiency benefit.
\[[8](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/06/thermal-efficiency-cooking-stoves.html#notes)\]



An electric glass-ceramic cooktop (Source: Wikimedia). Less efficient
than a well tended open fire.

Research into the efficiency of modern cooking stoves is rather limited.
According to a study by the Dutch research institute VHK, a traditional
electric cooktop (with vitro-ceramic plate) has a thermal efficiency of
13%, while that of an electric induction cooker is 15%. A microwave
obtains 19% thermal efficiency. Only a classical gas cooking stove (23%)
reaches the thermal efficiency of a well-tended three-stone fire.
\[[8](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/06/thermal-efficiency-cooking-stoves.html#notes)\]
While the study is aimed primarily at the preparation of hot drinks, it
is the most complete study available and its results are applicable to
cooking food with only a few small caveats.
\[[9](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/06/thermal-efficiency-cooking-stoves.html#notes)\]

Now, if we compare the thermal efficiencies from modern cooking stoves
with those from stoves used in poorer households, we see that the
improved biomass stoves in developing countries beat our "high-tech"
cooking technology with a factor of two to three (graphic below). Gas or
electric ovens are not included in this comparison, but their efficiency
is even lower than gas or electric hobs because water is a much better
conductor of heat than air.



The low efficiency of modern cooking devices may surprise people, as
these are not the figures that are usually presented in sales brochures
or consumer reports. For example, the Californian Consumer Energy Center
gives an efficiency level of 90% for an electric induction cooker, 65%
for a standard electric range, and 55% for a gas burner.
\[[10](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/06/thermal-efficiency-cooking-stoves.html#notes)\]

Power Conversion Losses

The main discrepancy with these figures is caused when one doesn't take
into account that electricity first needs to be produced in power plants
which sometimes convert less than a third of the primary energy into
electricity
\[[11](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/06/thermal-efficiency-cooking-stoves.html#notes)\].
This is not an issue with gas or biomass stoves, where a primary fuel is
directly converted into heat for cooking.
\[[12](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/06/thermal-efficiency-cooking-stoves.html#notes)\]
But it does have a destructive effect on the thermal efficiency of any
electric cooking device, be it an electric hob or a microwave. In the
graphic below, power conversion losses are indicated by the dark blue
bars.

The VHK study assumes an electric grid efficiency of 40%. This figure
takes into account power generation and distribution losses, as well as
fuel extraction and a projected saving on these issues over an average
product life of 10-15 years.
\[[8](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/06/thermal-efficiency-cooking-stoves.html#notes)\]
It should be noted that this percentage corresponds to a global average,
including the use of renewables and atomic energy. Depending on the
country, grid efficiency can be higher or lower.
\[[13](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/06/thermal-efficiency-cooking-stoves.html#notes)\]



Boiling water preparation energy impact (kWh primary energy for 1,000
litre useful boiled water per year) for different cooking devices. Dark
blue: power generation loss. Light blue: heat loss. Red: theoretical
minimum. Pink: production, distribution, end-of-life. Pink: extra
boiling time. Purple: standby. Green: over-filling. Source:
\[[8](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/06/thermal-efficiency-cooking-stoves.html#notes)\].

If we only look at the different types of thermal power plants, we find
that the thermal efficiency for a traditional coal plant (81% of all
coal-based power plants in use) is only 25 to 37%, while that of a
common direct-combustion biomass power plant is only 20%.
\[[13](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/06/thermal-efficiency-cooking-stoves.html#notes)\]\[[14](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/06/thermal-efficiency-cooking-stoves.html#notes)\]
At world level, the average energy efficiency of thermal power plants is
36%. \[13\] These percentages should be reduced with electric
transmission and distribution losses, which are on average 6% in Europe,
7% in the USA, and 9% on a world level.
\[[13](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/06/thermal-efficiency-cooking-stoves.html#notes)\]

This means that if your electric stove is operated by electricity from a
biomass power plant&mdash;[a fast growing "green" trend
nowadays](http://www.notechmagazine.com/2014/04/how-biomass-energy-has-become-the-new-coal.html)
-- the power conversion efficiency is three to four times lower (11-14%)
than the authors of the study assume, and thermal efficiency drops to
about 5%. This is similar to the thermal efficiency of a neglected open
fire, and one-tenth the thermal efficiency of a rocket stove. Likewise,
a cookstove which uses coal or gas directly to heat food is much more
energy efficient than a cookstove that runs on electricity produced by a
coal or gas power plant.

> Essentially, any electric cooking device is an insult to the science
> of thermodynamics

Evidently, there is something wrong with the western approach to
sustainability. Converting heat into electricity which is then converted
back into heat, at 20-40% efficiency, is similar to building a Rube
Goldberg machine; it's a needlessly complex operation compared to simply
converting the primary fuel into heat to boil water. Essentially, any
electric cooking device is an insult to the science of thermodynamics.

Heat Transfer Loss

A second problem is that the high efficiency figures given in sales
brochures and consumer reports underestimate the heat loss that occurs
during the heat transfer from cooking stove to cooking pot (shown by the
light blue bars in the graphic above). This heat loss is present with
all cooking stoves, but is especially high in the case of gas hobs. In
the graphic above, the red bar concerns the minimum energy that it takes
to boil 1,000 litres of water, assuming that there is no energy loss
during the heat transfer between the cooking stove and the water. This
value is 105 kWh/yr for a starting cold water temperature of 10 degrees
celsius.

Energy losses appear because of three reasons. Firstly, some heat from
the cooking fire escapes before it can reach the cooking vessel.
Secondly, some heat from the cooking fire is used to heat up the cooking
pot, which constantly loses heat to the environment. Lastly, heat is
wasted because some of the boiling water escapes through evaporation.
While the red bar is logically the same for every cooking device, the
light blue bar showing the additional energy required to compensate for
heat transfer loss varies from 57 kWh/yr for an electric induction stove
to 255 kWh/yr for a gas hob.



Gas stoves have the largest heat transfer losses of all modern cooking
stoves. Picture: [Ashley Bischoff @
Flickr](https://www.flickr.com/photos/handcoding/2306148621/sizes/l/in/photolist-9fwxsE-ceme3-6fsdHT-baqyQD-4vMBD8-7qKtbt-7wgwmh-5mxmYh-7t5MRY-32Zkcr-334VPJ-32ZneV-6WNUnd-4otRwY-9YKx7X-eNvbyf-5K212X-6oy431-3i4xq-5dhzoB-6aXzBk-bcpTDp-3LarEn-5Ru5J2-3i4xp-4sXcWB-4tNCfP-7teghU-8XjEGz-4KFDC7-4nXEtC-CgUdE-4hWhcF-4jFwAw-7estzW-49Ti1-9n5zm5-5vGLzJ-5LULtt-6v5ReY-67t5UC-5FrWB8-5vCsSD-6psLwc-a2JTdv-SBfWT-8shCrM-52ndMn-4RfqYF-7jkgdz/).

Heat transfer loss is not fully accounted for in most testing standards
for cooking appliances. For example, the US standard uses a test by
which the heat transfer efficiency of a cooking top is established from
heating up aluminum cylinders of certain dimensions, not pots of water.
\[[15](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/06/thermal-efficiency-cooking-stoves.html#notes)\]\[[16](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/06/thermal-efficiency-cooking-stoves.html#notes)\]
This avoids the complex phase change from liquid to vapour and is thus
better reproducible.

> Heat transfer loss is not fully accounted for in most testing
> standards for cooking appliances

However, as all the heat of the cylinder is counted as useful, it
ignores that in real life situations some energy&mdash;notably the energy
to heat up the pot or kettle itself&mdash;is wasted. Only taking into
account the energy loss in heating the pot itself, energy efficiency
decreases with about 10% of the figures given by standard tests,
concludes VHK.
\[[8](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/06/thermal-efficiency-cooking-stoves.html#notes)\]
Furthermore, the US test is modeled after the process of boiling food on
all burners or hot plates simultaneously, which is not always the case.
Heat transfer losses are larger when only one or two pots are on the
fire.



An outdoor three-stone fire. Image: [Global Alliance for Clean
Cookstoves](http://www.cleancookstoves.org/).

Apart from power conversion losses and heat transfer losses, the
remainder of the energy losses are due to production, distribution and
disposal of cooking devices (embodied energy), standby losses (which are
only relevant for microwaves, induction stoves and sophisticated gas
stoves), and cooking habits. These factors have a relatively small
influence.

Of all the energy losses involved in modern cooking appliances, only
heat transfer loss applies to cooking devices in poorer households.
There are no power conversion losses, fuel is mostly gathered by hand,
there are no standby losses, and embodied energy is negligible as most
devices are home-made.

Indoor Air Pollution in Rich vs. Poor Households

While the thermal efficiency of modern cooking devices is clearly
inferior to that of a well-tended three-stone fire or rocket stove, they
do have an advantage when it comes to indoor air pollution. However,
this is not a black-and-white issue either. Air pollution levels depend
on what you're cooking, how skillful you are, and which technology you
use.

In the worst case scenario, pollution levels in modern kitchens can be
similar to those of a well-tended three-stone fire indoors. This is not
to say that the problem of indoor pollution in poor households is
overstated, but rather that cooking in modern kitchens is not always as
clean as we assume it to be.

> Pollution levels in modern kitchens can be similar to those of a well
> tended three-stone fire inside the house

Particulate matter (PM) is considered as the single best indicator of
potential harm in air quality. \[4\] In poor households where indoor
cooking happens with crude stoves or open fires, PM-levels vary from 200
to 5,000 ug/m3 over a 24-hour period, and from 300 to 20,000 ug/m3
during the actual use of stoves.
\[[17](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/06/thermal-efficiency-cooking-stoves.html#notes)\]\[[18](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/06/thermal-efficiency-cooking-stoves.html#notes)\]\[[19](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/06/thermal-efficiency-cooking-stoves.html#notes)\]
The Partnership for Clean Indoor Air measured PM emissions for a well
tended three-stone fire, which resulted in values of between 281 and
2,004 ug/m3 while cooking.
\[[4](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/06/thermal-efficiency-cooking-stoves.html#notes)\]



Indoor cooking with biomass stoves. Image: [Global Alliance for Clean
Cookstoves](http://www.cleancookstoves.org/).

Similar research undertaken in a kitchen equipped with modern technology
found PM concentrations in the kitchen, living room and bedroom from
below the detection limit to 3,880 ug/m3 during a variety of 32
different cooking tests with gas and electric ranges.
\[[20](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/06/thermal-efficiency-cooking-stoves.html#notes)\]
The medium and average concentrations of PM during the 32 cooking tests
exceeded ambient air quality standards (which are 150 g/m3 for PM10 and
65 ug/m3 for PM2.5). These values come close to the best-case scenarios
in poor households.

Importantly, cooking pollutants are not caused by the burning of gas or
fuel alone, but also in the cooking process itself. PM2.5 concentrations
were over 1,000 ug/m3 during stovetop stir-frying, baking lasagna in the
gas oven, and frying tortillas in oil on the range top burner. The
authors conclude that:

"Very high levels of several pollutants were measured in indoor air
during different types of cooking activities. The levels measured for
some cooking activities exceeded health-based standards and guidelines,
and could pose a risk to home occupants, especially susceptible groups
of the population such as young children and the elderly."

Unfortunately, gas stoves&mdash;which have the highest thermal efficiency
of all modern cooking stoves&mdash;produce the most air pollution in modern
kitchens.
\[[20](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/06/thermal-efficiency-cooking-stoves.html#notes)\]
The average indoor PM emissions for gas stoves can amount to 25% of
those of biomass cooking stoves.
\[[19](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/06/thermal-efficiency-cooking-stoves.html#notes)\]
A 2014 study estimates that 60 percent of homes in California that cook
at least once a week with a gas stove can reach pollutant levels of CO,
NO2 and formaldehyde that would be illegal if found outdoors.
\[[21](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/06/thermal-efficiency-cooking-stoves.html#notes)\]
The authors state that:

"If these were conditions that were outdoors the EPA (Environmental
Protection Agency) would be cracking down. But since it's in people's
homes, there's no regulation requiring anyone to fix it. Reducing
people's exposure to pollutants from gas stoves should be a public
health priority."

Air Pollution and Greenhouse Gas Emissions

Obviously, indoor cooking with an electric stove is the healthiest
option, albeit not totally free from producing indoor air pollution.
However, electric stoves are only "clean" because they emit most of
their pollution elsewhere&mdash;at the smokestacks of the power plant. Any
biomass stove design with a chimney basically achieves the same. If a
chimney is added to an indoor biomass stove, indoor air pollution drops
to almost zero.
\[[4](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/06/thermal-efficiency-cooking-stoves.html#notes)\]



A clean cookstove in India. Image: [Global Alliance for Clean
Cookstoves](http://www.cleancookstoves.org/).

And while the burning of coal or gas emits less air pollution and
greenhouse gases than the burning of biomass per unit of energy produced
\[[22](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/06/thermal-efficiency-cooking-stoves.html#notes)\],
you have to burn more fuel in order to make up for the power conversion
losses. Especially if your electric stove runs on electricity from a
biomass power plant, then air pollution and greenhouse gas emissions are
much higher than in the case of a biomass stove.

> If electricity is produced by biomass, an electric cooking stove
> produces much more air pollution and greenhouse gases than a biomass
> stove

On the other hand, if we consider biomass to be climate neutral over
time because the harvested forest gets a chance to grow back, then a
biomass stove beats all other cooking methods when it comes to
greenhouse gas emissions. The same goes for the cooking stove powered by
electricity from biomass, although it would produce considerably more
air pollution than the biomass stove, and require a much larger area of
sustainably managed forest.

What's the solution?

When the German Wuppertal Institute investigated the potential for
improved energy efficiency of cooking stoves on a global scale, they
concluded that energy use could be halved.
\[[2](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/06/thermal-efficiency-cooking-stoves.html#notes)\]
Although it's remarkable how the proposed solutions for this energy
inefficiency differ for poor and rich countries. In the developing
world, the focus is mainly on designing more efficient biomass stoves
that produce fewer pollutants. While achieved savings as a result of
switching to biogas would be larger, its investment would be 30 times
higher compared to the distribution of improved wood cooking stoves.
\[[2](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2014/06/thermal-efficiency-cooking-stoves.html#notes)\]



An improved biomass cookstove in India. Source: [Global Alliance for
Clean Cookstoves](http://www.cleancookstoves.org/).

For the developed world, the Wuppertal Institute focuses on a much more
costly measure: extending the use of the most efficient types of
"western" stoves, such as the electric induction hob. However, as we
have seen, these stoves are far less efficient than the improved biomass
stoves, and they are also more expensive. The authors infer that,
compared to developing countries, energy saving potentials with modern
cooking stoves are far smaller and less cost-efficient. But as is
apparent from the inefficiencies of western cooking technology, the
energy savings potential is, in reality, larger.

One possibility for the West to improve the sustainability of its
cooking stoves, not mentioned by the Wuppertal Institute, is to generate
electricity by wind, solar or water energy. If electricity is generated
by renewable energy, electric hobs and microwaves suddenly beat all
other cooking stoves when it comes to efficiency, air pollution and
greenhouse gas emissions. That being said, using renewable energy to
produce electricity to create heat for cooking remains a needlessly
complex and costly approach to make cooking more sustainable.

There are some obvious but often overlooked solutions that would make
cooking close to 100% sustainable in rich and poor countries alike. See
our follow-up article: "[If we insulate our houses, why not our cooking
pots?]({filename}/posts/cooking-pot-insulation-key-to-sustainable-cooking.md)".

Kris De Decker (edited by [Jenna
Collett](https://www.linkedin.com/pub/jenna-collett/1a/925/b3))

### Sources

\[1\] "[What users can save with energy-efficient cooking stoves and
ovens](http://www.bigee.net/media/filer_public/2014/03/17/appliance__residential_cookingstoves__user_savings__20140220__8.pdf)",
Oliver Adria and Jan Bethge, October 2013.

\[2\] "[The overall worldwide saving potential from domestic cooking
stoves and
ovens](http://www.bigee.net/media/filer_public/2014/03/17/appliance__residential_cookingstoves__worldwide_potential__20140220__8.pdf)",
Oliver Adria and Jan Bethge, October 2013.

\[3\] As of 2012, the [Partnership for Clean Indoor
Air](http://www.pciaonline.org/node/2) (PCIA) has integrated with the
[Global Alliance for Clean Cookstoves](http://www.cleancookstoves.org/).

\[4\] "[Test Results of Cook Stove
Performance](http://my.ewb-usa.org/theme/library/myewb-usa/project-resources/technical/TestResultsCookstovePerformance.pdf)",
Partnership for Clean Indoor Air, 2012. See Appendix C for the
University of California Berkeley (UCB) Water Boiling Test (WBT)
protocols.

\[5\] "A laboratory comparison of the global warming impact of five
major types of biomass cooking stoves", Nordica MacCarthy, 2008

\[6\] Thermal efficiency rewards the production of excess steam, while
specific consumption penalizes it. For the pros and contras of both
testing approaches, see \[4\], page 76-77.

\[7\] These percentages concern the outer values of different test
procedures and during different stages of the cooking process. The
thermal efficiency of a rocket stove is especially high when bringing
water to boil but its advantage is much smaller during simmering.

\[8\] "[Quooker Energy
Analysis](http://www.vhk.nl/downloads/Energy%20analysis%20Quooker%20main%20final%20april%202010.pdf)",
Part one, Van Holsteijn en Kemna B.V. (VHK), March 2010.

\[9\] The heat transfer efficiency figures chosen by \[8\] are based on
a typical mixed use of cooking stoves, in which the energy is used both
for preparing meals and for hot drinks. Since boiling smaller amounts of
water for hot drinks is somewhat less efficient, this approach
underestimates the heat transfer efficiency of cooking food. However, to
be on the safe side, the researchers are rather conservative in their
revision of heat transfer efficiencies (see chapters 2.2 & 2.4), so the
difference must be small.

\[10\] "[Stoves, Ranges and
Ovens](http://www.consumerenergycenter.org/residential/appliances/ranges.html)",
Consumer Energy Center, California Energy Commission.

\[11\] The average efficiency of a coal plant is 35%. See: "[Power
generation from coal: Measuring and Reporting Efficiency Performance and
CO2
Performance](http://www.iea.org/ciab/papers/power_generation_from_coal.pdf)",
OECD/IEA, 2010.

\[12\] It should be noted that the [energy losses of the natural gas
distribution network can be rather
large,](http://www.bu.edu/cas/2012/11/20/thousands-of-natural-gas-leaks-discovered-in-boston/?inf_contact_key=4a5b801cb4423703db24845fc797708d071f3806a11653eec172adbfec6cd10a)and
this fact does not seem to be taken into account in the study. The
thermal efficiency of gas stoves may thus be overstated. The same goes
for the greenhouse gas emissions, mainly due to [methane leaks during
gas
production](http://e360.yale.edu/digest/climate_benefits_of_natural_gasare_questioned_in_a_major_new_report/4076/).

\[13\] "[The state of global energy efficiency: global and sectorial
energy efficiency
trends](http://www.abb-energyefficiency.com/assets/documents-download/ABB-Trends-in-global-energy-efficiency-2013.pdf)",
Enerdata.

\[14\] "[How is biomass energy
used?](http://www.centreforenergy.com/AboutEnergy/Biomass/Overview.asp?page=2)",
Canadian Centre for Energy Information.

\[15\] "[Test Procedure for Residential Kitchen Ranges and
Ovens](http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/CFR-2012-title10-vol3/pdf/CFR-2012-title10-vol3-part430-subpartB-appI.pdf)",
US Department of Energy, 1997. For related documents, see "[Residential
Kitchen Ranges and
Ovens](http://www1.eere.energy.gov/buildings/appliance_standards/product.aspx/productid/57)".

\[16\] "[Evaluation of Kitchen Cooking Appliance Efficiency Test
Procedures](http://fire.nist.gov/bfrlpubs/build99/PDF/b99015.pdf)",
Steven Nabinger, US Department of Commerce, 1999

\[17\] "[Smoke, health and household energy. Volume
1](http://practicalaction.org/media/preview/7052/lng:en)", Liz Bates,
2005.

\[18\] "[The health effects of indoor air pollution exposure in
developing
countries](http://whqlibdoc.who.int/hq/2002/WHO_SDE_OEH_02.05.pdf?ua=1)",
WHO, 2002

\[19\] "[health effects of chronic exposure to smoke from biomass fuel
burning in rural
areas](https://www.academia.edu/1071891/Health_effects_of_chronic_exposure_to_smoke_from_Biomass_Fuel_burning_in_rural_areas)",
WHO India, 2007

\[20\] "[Indoor Air Quality: Residential Cooking
Exposures](http://www.arb.ca.gov/research/indoor/cooking/0-Cover-TOC-Exec-Summary.PDF)",
R. Fortmann et al., State of California Air Resources Board, 2001

\[21\] "[Pollutant exposures from natural gas cooking burners: a
simulation-based assessment for southern
california](http://ehp.niehs.nih.gov/wp-content/uploads/122/1/ehp.1306673.pdf)",
Environmental Health Perspectives, January 2014.

\[22\] "[Trees, Trash, and Toxics: How Biomass Energy Has Become the New
Coal](http://www.pfpi.net/wp-content/uploads/2014/04/PFPI-Biomass-is-the-New-Coal-April-2-2014.pdf)",
Mary . Booth, Partnership for Policy Integrity, April 2014

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
