Title: The art of producing sustainable consumer goods: basketry
Date: 2012-02-24 14:03
Author: Kris De Decker
Category: Obsolete Technology
Tags: basketry
Slug: basketry-the-art-of-producing-sustainable-consumer-goods
Status: published

This is a guest post by Brian Kaller, who blogs at [Restoring
Mayberry](http://restoringmayberry.blogspot.com/).


have been replaced by plastic and other kinds of factory-made containers
in almost every area of life, appearing today mainly as twee Easter
decorations. Making them has become synonymous with wasting time –
“basket-weaving” in the USA is slang for an easy lesson for slow
students.

The craft of basketry, however, might be one of our species’ most
important and diverse technologies, creating homes, boats, animal traps,
armour, tools, cages, hats, chariots, weirs, beehives, shelters and
furniture, as well as all manner of containers. Basket weaving makes use
of fast-growing biodegradable materials&mdash;branches, twigs or shoots --
that requires the forest to be cultivated rather than cleared. Basketry
allows almost anyone, with little or no money and few tools, to create a
large variety of useful goods in a way that is one hundred percent
sustainable.

Picture: Big burden basket by [Joe Hogan
Baskets](http://www.joehoganbaskets.com/).


We tend to think of technology as rock and metal – from the Stone Age to
the Iron Age, from pyramids and statues to Viking swords and pirate
cannons. We think of the things that survive to be placed in museums, in
other words, and tend to neglect the early and important inventions that
ordinary people used every day but whose materials did not survive
centuries of exposure.


[Joe Hogan Baskets](http://www.joehoganbaskets.com/).

29,000 years of history

Virtually all human cultures have made baskets, and have apparently done
so since we co-existed with ground sloths and sabre-toothed cats; for
tens of thousands of years humans may have slept in basket-frame huts,
kept predators out with basket fences, and caught fish in basket traps
gathered while paddling along a river in a basket-frame boat. They might
have carried their babies in basket papooses and gone to their graves in
basket coffins.

> Some of the first agriculture might have been to grow basketry crops,
> not food crops

The earliest piece of ancient basketry we have comes from 13,000 years
ago, but impressions on ceramics from Central Europe indicate woven
fibres&mdash;textiles or baskets –- up to 29,000 years ago. (1) We have
clues that the technology might be far older than that; in theory,
Neanderthals or some early hominid could have woven baskets.


[Joe Hogan Baskets](http://www.joehoganbaskets.com/).

“The technology of basketry was central to daily living in every
aboriginal society,” wrote ecologist Neil Sugihara, and baskets “were
the single most essential possession in every family”. (2) Early humans
must have regularly cropped basketry plants as they would edible plants,
and burned woodlands to encourage their growth, according to
anthropologist M. K. Anderson. Anderson even proposes that some of the
first agriculture might have been to grow basketry crops, not food
crops. (3)

Main basket types

Baskets come in several main types. Coiled baskets appeared early,
created by winding flexible plant fibres from a centre outward in a
spiral and then sewing the structure together. Their spiral nature,
however, limits them to circular objects; beehive containers, called
skeps, were built this way for hundreds of years, and straw hats still
are today.

The earliest American baskets were twined; fibre was wound around a row
of rigid elements like sticks – wrapped around one, twisted, wrapped
around the next one and twisted again. The sticks would seem to limit
this approach to flat surfaces like mats, but bending and shaping the
sticks allows twining to create a variety of containers and shapes.


high sleeper, by [Coopérative Vannerie de
Villaines](http://www.vannerie.com/index.php?lng=fr_FR).

Still others were plaited, with flexible materials criss-crossed like
threads through cloth. The Irish flattened and plaited bulrushes for
hundreds of years into mats and curtains. Here too, the approach would
seem to limit plaiting to flat surfaces, but as the rushes must be woven
while green and flexible and harden as they dry, they can be plaited
around a mould to create boxes, bags or many other shapes.


however, probably remains the most versatile technique, weaving flexible
but sturdy material like tree shoots around upright sticks that provide
support. Wicker is the form used for fences, walls, furniture, animal
traps and many other advanced shapes, and when you picture a basket,
you’re probably picturing wicker too. (4)

Picture: Seven-band backpack baskets by [Hiroshima
Kazuro](http://kaladarshan.arts.ohio-state.edu/Exhibitions/basketMakerExhibit.html#exhibit).

Hurdle fences

Once early humans mastered the technique of fashioning wicker, they
began using it for a variety of purposes beyond carrying and preparing
food, and shelter probably came next. Wattle fences were made with a row
of upright poles with flexible wood cuttings woven between them, a
basket wall. Unusually, they could be made in modular, lightweight
pieces a metre or two high and a metre or two across – hurdles&mdash;and
then uprooted, carried to a new location, and stamped into the ground
where needed.

The uprights, sometimes called zales or sails in Britain, were typically
rounded at the end and placed in a wooden frame, sometimes called a
gallows, to hold them in place. Then withies – slim cuttings of willow
or hazel – were wound back and forth around the uprights. At the end of
the hurdle the withy would be twisted for greater flexibility, wound
around the last zale, and woven back in the other direction. Usually a
gap would be left in the middle of the hurdle, called a twilly hole,
which allowed a shepherd or farmer to carry a few hurdles as a time on
his back.


fence, source: [Windrush
Willow](http://www.windrushwillow.com/index.html).

According to author Una McGovern, hurdle fences were vital to medieval
agriculture; by keeping sheep confined without the need for permanent
infrastructure, they allowed tenant farmers to graze sheep on a patch of
land, letting them manure the fields one by one and deposit the
fertilisers necessary for cereal crops. (5)

Basketry buildings

The same technique could form the walls of a house, once a log or timber
frame was built and the wattle filled in with a “daub” plaster for
insulation and privacy. The daub often contained clay, human or animal
hair and cow dung, and hardened around the wattle like concrete around
rebar. The resulting structure could last for centuries, and even now
restoring or demolishing old buildings sometimes reveals wattle inside
the walls.


and daub wall of a 1905 house in Belgium
([source](http://www.rootsweb.ancestry.com/~belghist/Flanders/Pages/tremelo.htm)).

Similar techniques were used by cultures around the world, from Vikings
to Chinese to Mayans. While their cheap and easily available materials
made them an obviously popular and practical building method, not all
builders loved it. The Roman architect Vetruvius, in the first century
AD, moaned about the hazards of such cheap material in his Ten Books on
Architecture:

*“As for ‘wattle and daub’ I could wish that it had never been
invented,” Veruvius wrote. “The more it saves in time and gains in
space, the greater and the more general is the disaster that it may
cause; for it is made to catch fire, like torches. It seems better,
therefore, to spend on walls of burnt brick, and be at expense, than to
save with ‘wattle and daub,’ and be in danger. And, in the stucco
covering, too, it makes cracks from the inside by the arrangement of its
studs and girts. For these swell with moisture as they are daubed, and
then contract as they dry, and, by their shrinking, cause the solid
stucco to split.*

*But since some are obliged to use it either to save time or money, or
for partitions on an unsupported span, the proper method of construction
is as follows. Give it a high foundation so that it may nowhere come in
contact with the broken stone-work composing the floor; for if it is
sunk in this, it rots in course of time, then settles and sags forward,
and so breaks through the surface of the stucco covering.”* (6)

Woven boats


as it sounds, basketry has long been used to make boats. How long we
don’t know, but humans appeared in Australia 40,000 years ago, even
though it was separated from Asia even in the Ice Age. They might have
built wicker boats covered in animal skins, but even if they merely tied
logs together into rafts, they must have had the related technology of
making fibre and [tying it into
knots](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/knots/).

The Irish used woven boats, or coracles, for hundreds – and probably
thousands&mdash;of years; they are mentioned in medieval Irish literature
and are still made by aficionados today.

Irish coracles. Source: [Guy Mallison Woodland
Workshop](http://guymallinson.blogspot.com/2010/07/coracles-in-herefordshire.html).

> The coracle’s small size and lightweight construction ensured that,
> after the occupant had paddled across rivers, lakes or marshes, he
> could pick up his boat and walk across country with ease

All were woven from willow or hazel and covered with a hide – usually
cow hide, but horse-hide and sealskin were also used – and supposedly
waterproofed with butter. All of them were alarmingly tiny crafts in
which a person sat cross-legged and sat carefully upright to avoid
tipping over, like a bowl-shaped kayak. The coracle’s small size and
lightweight construction ensured that, after the occupant had paddled
across rivers, lakes or marshes, he could pick up his boat and walk
across country with ease.


a coracle, first step. Source: [Guy Mallison Woodland
Workshop](http://guymallinson.blogspot.com/2010/07/coracles-in-herefordshire.html).

To take to the sea, the Irish wove curraghs&mdash;larger and oval-shaped to
navigate across choppy waters, but still no larger than a rowboat.
Documentary footage from 1937 showed men constructing a Boyne curragh;
first planting hazel rods in the ground in the desired shape, and
weaving a tight frame between them along the ground – what would become
the gunwale, or rim, when the frame was flipped over. Then the hazel
rods were twisted together to make a wicker dome, and the frame was
uprooted and turned upright and a hide placed around the frame and
oiled. (7)


for river crabs, made by [Hiroshima
Kazuro](http://kaladarshan.arts.ohio-state.edu/Exhibitions/basketMakerExhibit.html#exhibit).

Fish traps

One common use of such craft was to set and gather fish and eel traps
from rivers and lobster pots from the sea – also made, of course, from
wicker. Such foods were an important source of protein, especially in
Catholic countries where meat was sometimes forbidden. The traps
operated on a simple principle; a bit of bait could lure an animal into
the trap but, if it were shaped properly, they would be unable to
escape.


the Eel Bucks ' - From 'Life on the Upper Thames' by H.R. Robinson, 1875
([source](http://canalbookcollector.blogspot.com/2011/03/engraving-of-week_23.html))

Hundreds of plant species

Baskets can be woven with any one of hundreds of plant species,
depending on whatever was available. In more tropical climates people
used cane or raffia, while in temperate areas like Europe a wide variety
of branches and plants were available: dogwood, privet, larch,
blackthorn and chestnut branches; broom, jasmine and periwinkle twigs;
elm, and linden shoots; ivy, clematis, honeysuckle and rose vines;
rushes and other reeds, and straw.


of Brittany Blue willow in Kildare, Ireland in February. Picture by
Brian Kaller.

Perhaps the most popular, however, was willow&mdash;sallies or
silver-sticks here in Ireland, osiers in Britain, vikker in Old Norse,
the last of which became our word “wicker.” They are highly pliable when
young or wet, lightweight and tough when dried, and grow so quickly that
a new crop of branches up to three metres long can be harvested each
year. As one of the earliest trees to grow back after an old tree falls
and leaves a gap of sunlight in the forest, or after a forest fire razes
an area, they are perhaps the tree closest to a weed in behaviour.


Cutting', from 'Life on the Upper Thames ' by H.R. Robinson, 1875
([source](http://canalbookcollector.blogspot.com/2011/05/engraving-of-week.html))

Their roots spread rapidly under the surface of the soil, making them an
ideal crop to halt erosion. Their fast growth makes an excellent
windbreak, the basis of most
[hedgerows](http://www.notechmagazine.com/2011/04/irish-hedgerows.html),
and makes them particularly useful in our era for sequestering carbon
and combating climate change. In addition, the bark of the white willow
(Salix alba) can be boiled to form acetecylic acid, or aspirin.

Cleaning the soil

In addition, the common variety Salix viminalis or “basket willow,” has
been shown to be a hyper-accumulator of heavy metals. Many plants help
“clean” the soil by soaking up disproportionate levels of normally toxic
materials, either as a quirk of their metabolism or as a way of
protecting themselves against predators by making themselves poisonous.
Many plants soak up only a single toxin, others only a few; Viminalis,
it turned out, soaked up a broad range, including lead, cadmium,
mercury, chromium, zinc, fossil-fuel hydrocarbons, uranium, selenium,
potassium ferro-cyanide and silver. (8) (9) (10)


harvested stools in front, standing crop at rear, source: [Joe Hogan
Baskets](http://www.joehoganbaskets.com/)

Many hardwood trees can be coppiced, cut through at the base, or
pollarded, cut at head-height, and regrow shoots on a
five-to-twenty-year time scale. Willows, however, do not need to grow to
maturity, and continue to thicken at the base and grow a fresh crop of
shoots each year. Basket-weavers here harvested willow as a winter
ritual – ten tonnes to the acre – from fields of large century-old
stumps that had never been mature trees. (11)

> Out of hundreds of traditional crafts, none has so many everyday
> applications

Once the willow is cut it could be dried with the bark on, or the bark
could be stripped off. Stripping was a tedious task but it made the
willow easier to quickly prepare and use, reduced the risk of decay, and
it gave the willow a valued white colour. To strip the bark a large
willow branch was cut partway down its length, with metal strips
attached to the inside of the cut; the weaver could hold the branch
between their legs and use it as we would use a wire-stripping tool to
remove insulation. When cuttings were too thick to manipulate, a special
tool called a cleve was used to cut them three ways down their length.



Basketry banisters by [Coopérative Vannerie de
Villaines](http://www.vannerie.com/index.php?lng=fr_FR).

Withies were typically dried for several months and kept indefinitely
before soaking again for use. Willow can be woven straight from the
tree, but as it dries it loosens and the weave shifts and rattles, which
is seldom desirable. To a novice, preparing the materials presents as
much of a challenge as the actual weaving, as the willow must be dried
but re-soaked, kept wet without rotting, and used before becoming dry
and brittle again.

Everyday applications

Today a small but growing movement of people around the world tries to
rediscover and re-cultivate traditional crafts and technologies. Many
such techniques deserve to be revived; but some require substantial
experimentation, skill, training, infrastructure or community
participation. Not all low-tech solutions can be adopted casually by
modern urbanites taking their first steps toward a more traditional
life.


weaver. Source: [Roule ta bosse!](http://rouletabosse.over-blog.fr/)

Basket-weaving, however, requires no money other than that needed for
training and possibly materials. It uses crops easily found in almost
every biome on Earth, and requires few if any tools. Highly skilled
weavers can create works of art, but simple and practical weaves can be
done by almost anyone. Out of hundreds of traditional crafts, none has
so many everyday applications.

Brian Kaller

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


Kaller is a journalist living in rural Ireland. He interviews elderly
Irish about traditional ways of life, and writes a weekly column about
the Long Emergency for his local newspaper. Brian blogs at [Restoring
Mayberry](http://restoringmayberry.blogspot.com/). Some of his posts
there were previously highlighted at No Tech Magazine:

-   [Fences of fruit
    trees](http://www.notechmagazine.com/2011/06/fences-of-fruit-trees.html)
-   [Irish
    hedgerows](http://www.notechmagazine.com/2011/04/irish-hedgerows.html)

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Citations:

\(1) Archeologické rozhledy, 2007, Baskets in Western America 8600 BP:
American Antiquity 60(2), 1995, pp. 309-318.

\(2) Fire in California's ecosystems, By Neil G. Sugihara, p. 421

\(3) Anderson, M.K. – The fire, pruning and coppice management of
temperate ecosystems for basketry material by Californian Indian tribes.
Human Ecology 27(I) 79-113. 1999.

\(4) The Complete Book of Basketry Techniques, Sue Gabriel and Sally
Goyner, David and Charles 1999.

\(5) Lost Crafts, Una McGovern, Chambers 2009

\(6) Ten Books on Architecture, Vetruvius, Chapter 8, Section 20. Circa
20 BCE

\(7) Hands, RTE documentary by Sally Shaw Smith, episode 29, “Curraghs.”

\(8) Phytoremediation. By McCutcheon & Schnoor. 2003, New Jersey, John
Wiley & Sons, page 19.

\(9) Enhancing Phytoextraction: The Effect of Chemical Soil Manipulation
on Mobility, Plant Accumulation, and Leaching of Heavy Metals. By Ulrich
Schmidt. In J. Environ. Qual. 32:1939-1954 (2003).

\(10) The potential for phytoremediation of iron cyanide complex by
Willows. By X.Z. Yu, P.H. Zhou and Y.M. Yang. In Ecotoxicology 2006.

\(11) Bulletin of the Bussey Institution, Vol. II, Part VIII. p. 430.
Published 1899. C. D. Mell’s 1908 book Basket Willow Culture urged
farmers to grow willows as a cash crop to feed the continual demand of
weaving material, maintaining that “the demand for basket willow rods is
very great and every year many thousands of bundles of rods … are
imported from France, Germany and Holland.” Incredibly, it seemed that
as highly valued as baskets were in the USA, the then-sparsely-inhabited
country was still importing willow from comparatively small and crowded
Old World countries.

\(12) Basket Willow Culture, C. D. Mell, Report Publishing Company 1908

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Related articles:



[How to tie the world together: online knotting reference
books]({filename}/posts/how-to-tie-the-world-together-online-knotting-reference-books.md)
The sheer number and diversity of knots that was once in use would be
bewildering to the modern city-dweller. About 4,000 different knots are
described, ranging from the very simple to the extremely complex.

[Lost knowledge: ropes and
knots]({filename}/posts/lost-knowledge-ropes-and-knots.md)
They are among the most ancient and useful technologies ever developed
by man, predating the wheel, the axe and probably also the use of fire.
Today, ropes and knots are fast on their way to become an obsolete
technology.

[Parabolic basket for a tin can solar
cooker](http://www.notechmagazine.com/2012/01/tin-can-solar-cooker.html)
The structure of a parabolic solar cooker can be made using traditional
basketry construction methods. The same goes for other solar
concentrators such as the Solar Fire P32, described in the article on
[]({filename}/posts/solar-powered-factories.md)[solar
powered
factories](www.lowtechmagazine.com/2011/07/solar-powered-factories.html).

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
