Title: Email in the 18th century: the optical telegraph
Date: 2007-12-23 16:56
Author: Kris De Decker
Category: Obsolete Technology
Slug: email-in-the-18
Status: published


More than 200 years ago it was already possible to send messages
throughout Europe and America at the speed of an aeroplane – wireless
and without need for electricity.

Email leaves all other communication systems far behind in terms of
speed. But the principle of the technology – forwarding coded messages
over long distances – is nothing new. It has its origins in the use of
plumes of smoke, fire signals and drums, thousands of years before the
start of our era. Coded long distance communication also formed the
basis of a remarkable but largely forgotten communications network that
prepared the arrival of the internet: the optical
telegraph.[](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/e-mail-de-baja-tecnologia.html)

  
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div>

> Every tower had a telegrapher, looking through the telescope at the
> previous tower in the chain.

</div>

Throughout history, long distance communication was a matter of patience
– lots of patience. Postmen have existed longer than humans can write,
but the physical transport of spoken or written messages was always
limited by the speed of the messenger. Humans or
[horses]({filename}/posts/horses-agricult.md)
can maintain a speed of 5 or 6 kilometres an hour for long distances. If
they walk 10 hours a day, the transmission of a message from Paris to
Antwerp would take about a week.

Postal services

Already in antiquity, post systems were designed that made use of the
changing of postmen. In these stations, the message was transferred to
another runner or rider, or the horseman could change his horse. These
organised systems greatly increased the speed of the postal services.
The average speed of a galloping horse is 21 kilometres an hour, which
means that the distance in time between Paris and Antwerp could be
shortened to a few days. A [carrier
pigeon]({filename}/posts/sneakernet-beats-internet.md)
was twice as fast, but less reliable. Intercontinental communication was
limited to the speed of shipping.



Centuries of slow long-distance communications came to an end with the
arrival of the telegraph. Most history books start this chapter with the
appearance of the electrical telegraph, midway the nineteenth century.
However, they skip an important intermediate step. Fifty years earlier
(in 1791) the Frenchman Claude Chappe developed the optical telegraph.
Thanks to this technology, messages could be transferred very quickly
over long distances, without the need for postmen, horses, wires or
electricity.

A chain of towers

The optical telegraph network consisted of a chain of towers, each
placed 5 to 20 kilometres apart from each other. On each of these towers
a wooden semaphore and two telescopes were mounted (the telescope was
invented in 1600). The semaphore had two signalling arms which each
could be placed in seven positions. The wooden post itself could also be
turned in 4 positions, so that 196 different positions were possible.
Every one of these arrangements corresponded with a code for a letter, a
number, a word or (a part of) a sentence.1,380 kilometres an hour

Every tower had a telegrapher, looking through the telescope at the
previous tower in the chain. If the semaphore on that tower was put into
a certain position, the telegrapher copied that symbol on his own tower.
Next he used the telescope to look at the succeeding tower in the chain,
to control if the next telegrapher had copied the symbol correctly. In
this way, messages were signed through symbol by symbol from tower to
tower. The semaphore was operated by two levers. A telegrapher could
reach a speed of 1 to 3 symbols per minute.



The technology today may sound a bit absurd, but in those times the
optical telegraph was a genuine revolution. In a few decades,
continental networks were built both in Europe and the United States.
The first line was built between Paris and Lille during the French
revolution, close to the frontline. It was 230 kilometres long and
consisted of 15 semaphores. The very first message – a military victory
over the Austrians – was transmitted in less than half an hour. The
transmission of 1 symbol from Paris to Lille could happen in ten
minutes, which comes down to a speed of 1,380 kilometres an hour. Faster
than a modern passenger plane – this was invented only one and a half
centuries later.


Amsterdam to VeniceThe technology expanded very fast. In less than 50
years time the French built a national infrastructure with more than 530
towers and a total length of almost 5,000 kilometres. Paris was
connected to Strasbourg, Amsterdam, Toulon, Perpignan, Lyon, Turin,
Milan and Venice. At the beginning of the 19th century, it was possible
to wirelessly transmit a short message from Amsterdam to Venice in one
hour’s time. A few years before, a messenger on a horse would have
needed at least a month’s time to do the same.

The system was copied on a large scale in other countries. Sweden
developed a country-wide network, followed by parts of England and North
America. A bit later also Spain, Germany and Russia constructed a large
optical telegraph infrastructure. Most of these countries devised their
own variations on the optical telegraph, using shutters instead of arms
for example. Sweden developed a system that was twice as fast, Spain
built a telegraph that was windproof. Later the optical telegraph was
also put into action in shipping and rail traffic.

A real European network never really existed. The connection between
Amsterdam and Venice existed for only a short period. When Napoleon was
chased out of the Netherlands, his telegraph network was dismantled. The
Spanish, on the other hand, started too late. Their nationwide network
was only finished when the technology started to fall into disuse in
other countries. The optical telegraph network was solely used for
military and national communications, individuals did not have access to
it – although it was used for transmitting winning lottery numbers and
stock market data.

The optical telegraph disappeared as fast as it came. This happened with
the arrival of the electrical telegraph, fifty years later. The last
optical line in France was stopped in 1853, in Sweden the technology was
used up to 1880. The electrical telegraph was not hindered by mist,
wind, heavy rainfall or low hanging clouds, and it could also be used at
night.



Moreover, the electrical telegraph was cheaper than the mechanical
variant. Another advantage was that it was much harder to intercept a
message – whoever knew the code of the optical telegraph, could decipher
the message. The electrical telegraph also made intercontinental
communication possible, which was impossible with the optical telegraph
(unless you made a large detour via Asia).

The electrical telegraph was the main means of communication for
transmitting text messages over long distances for more than 100 years.
At first, electrical wires were used; later on radio waves were used to
communicate. The first line was built in 1844, the first transatlantic
connection was put into use in 1865. The telegraph made use of Morse
code, where dots and dashes symbolize letters and numbers.

Not the telephone, nor the railroads, nor radio or television made the
telegraph obsolete. The technology only died with the arrival of the fax
and the computer networks in the second half of the 20th century. Also
in rail-traffic and shipping optical telegraphy was replaced by
electronic variants, but in shipping the technology is still used in
emergency situations (by means of flags or lamps).

Keyboard

The electrical telegraph is the immediate predecessor of e-mail and
internet. Since the thirties, it was even possible to transmit images. A
variant equipped with a keyboard was also developed, so that the
technology could be used by people without any knowledge of Morse code.
The optical as well as the electrical telegraph are both in essence the
same technology as the internet and e-mail.

All these means of communication make use of code language and
intermediate stations to transmit information across large distances;
the optical telegraph uses visual signs, the electrical telegraph dots
and dashes, the internet ones and zeroes. Plumes of smoke and fire
signals are also telegraphic systems – in combination with a telescope
they would be as efficient as an optical telegraph.

Low-tech internet

Of course, e-mail is much more efficient than the optical telegraph. But
that does not alter the fact that the low-tech predecessor of electronic
mail more or less obtained the same result without wires or energy,
while the internet consists of a cluster of cables and is devouring our
energy resources at an ever faster pace.

*© Text: Kris De Decker (edited by Vincent Grosjean)
([es](http://www.es.lowtechmagazine.com/2007/12/correo-electrni.html))([nl](http://www.lowtechmagazine.be/))
// © Picture intro and maps Holland, Belgium and France : [Ecole
Centrale de Lyon](http://chappe.ec-lyon.fr/) // © Map optical telegraph
network in Spain, 1844-1857 : [Luis Enrique Otero
Carvajal](http://www.ucm.es/info/hcontemp/leoc/telegrafo%20optico.htm)
// Comments on the article can be found on
[Slashdot](http://slashdot.org/article.pl?sid=07/12/23/2229228)*

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
   
   
   
   
 ------------------------------------------------------------------------

More:



-   [The mechanical transmission of
    power (1)]({filename}/posts/mechanical-transmission-of-power-stangenkunst.md):
    Stangenkunst
-   [The mechanical transmission of
    power (2)]({filename}/posts/the-mechanical-transmission-of-power-jerker-line-systems.md):
    jerker line systems
-   [Human powered cranes and lifting
    devices]({filename}/posts/history-of-human-powered-cranes.md):
    the sky is the limit
-   [How to downsize a transport
    network]({filename}/posts/the-chinese-wheelbarrow.md):
    the Chinese wheelbarrow
-   [Computing without
    electricity]({filename}/posts/computers-antiq.md)
    : mechanical calculators
-   [Satellite navigation in the 18th
    century]({filename}/posts/satellite-nav-1.md)
    : who needs GPS?

  

  

  

