Title: Restoring the Old Way of Warming: Heating People, not Places
Date: 2015-02-11 18:32
Author: Kris De Decker
Category: Obsolete Technology
Slug: heating-people-not-spaces
Status: published



These days, we provide thermal comfort in winter by heating the entire
volume of air in a room or building. In earlier times, our forebear's
concept of heating was more localized: heating people, not places.

They used radiant heat sources that warmed only certain parts of a room,
creating micro-climates of comfort. These people countered the large
temperature differences with insulating furniture, such as hooded chairs
and folding screens, and they made use of additional, personal heating
sources that warmed specific body parts.

It would make a lot of sense to restore this old way of warming,
especially since modern technology has made it so much more practical,
safe and efficient.

  [Die Bauern
und die
Zeitung](http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Anker_Die_Bauern_und_die_Zeitung_1867.jpg),
a painting by Albert Anker, 1867.*******

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Most modern heating systems are primarily based on the heating of air.
This seems an obvious choice, but there are far worthier alternatives.
There are three types of (sensible) heat transfer: convection (the
heating of air), conduction (heating through physical contact), and
radiation (heating through electromagnetic waves).

The old way of warming was based upon radiation and conduction, which
are more energy-efficient than convection. While convection implies the
warming of each cubic centimetre of air in a space in order to keep
people comfortable, radiation and conduction can directly transfer heat
to people, making energy use independent of the size of a room or
building.

Conduction, Convection, Radiation

First, let's have a look at the different methods of heat transfer in
some more detail. Conduction and convection are closely related.
Conduction concerns the transfer of energy due to the physical contact
between two objects: heat will flow from the warmer to the cooler
object. The speed at which this happens depends on the thermal
resistance of the substance. For example, heat is transferred much
faster through metal than through wood, because metal has a lower
thermal resistance. This explains why, for instance, a cold metal object
feels much colder than a cold wooden object, even though they both have
the same temperature.


heat transfer from the body to the environment.

Conduction not only occurs between physical objects, but also between
physical objects and gasses (like air), and between gasses mutually.
Each physical object that is warmer than the air that surrounds it,
heats up the air in the immediate vicinity through conduction. By
itself, this effect is limited, because air has a high thermal
resistance&mdash;that's why it forms the basis of most thermal insulation
materials. However, the air that is warmed by conduction expands and
rises. Its place is taken by cold air, which is heated in turn, expands,
rises, and so on. This plume of warm air that rises from every object
that is warmer than the surrounding air, is called convection.

Radiation, the third form of sensible heat transfer, works in a very
different way from conduction and convection. Radiant energy is
transferred through electromagnetic waves, similar to light or sound.
More precisely, it concerns the part of the electromagnetic spectrum
that's called infrared radiation. Radiation doesn't need a medium (like
air or water) for heat transfer. It also works in a vacuum and it's the
most important form of heat transfer in outer space. The primary source
of radiant energy is the sun, but every object on earth radiates infared
energy as long as it has mass and a temperature above absolute zero.
This energy can be absorbed by other objects with a lower temperature.
Radiant energy doesn't have a temperature. Only when it hits the surface
of an object with mass, the energy can be absorbed and converted into
heat.

Thermal Comfort at Low Air Temperatures

Because of the general use of central air heating (and cooling) systems,
we have come to believe that our indoor thermal comfort depends mainly
on air temperature. However, the human body exchanges heat with its
environment through convection, radiation, conduction and evaporation (a
form of "latent" heat transfer). Convection relates to the heat exchange
between the skin and the surrounding air, radiation is the heat exchange
between the skin and the surrounding surfaces, evaporation concerns the
moisture loss from the skin, and conduction relates to the heat exchange
between a part of the human body and another object that it's in contact
with.

> If the share of radiation or conduction in the total heat transfer
> increases, people can be perfectly comfortable at a lower air
> temperature during the heating season

In winter we can remain comfortable in lower air temperatures by
increasing the share of radiation or conduction in the total heat
transfer of a space. The opposite is also true: conduction and radiation
can make people feel uncomfortable in spite of a high air temperature.
For example, a person standing on a cold floor with bare feet will feel
cold, even if the air temperature is a comfortable 21ºC (70ºF). This is
because the body loses heat to the floor through conduction. A hot cup
of soup in the hand, floor heating, or a heated bench have the opposite
effect, because heat is transferred from the warm object to the body
through conduction.

Radiant heat can make people comfortable at a lower air temperature,
too. The obvious example is direct sunlight. In spring or autumn, we can
sit comfortably outside in the sun wearing only a T-shirt, even if the
air temperature is relatively low. A metre away, in the shade, it can be
cold enough to need a jacket, although the air temperature is more or
less the same. In summer, we prefer the shade. The difference is
explained by the radiant energy of the sun, which heats the body
directly when it is exposed to sunlight. This higher "radiant
temperature", which can be measured with a black-globe thermometer,
allows thermal comfort at a colder air temperature in winter.



Radiant heating systems compensate a lower air temperature with a higher
radiant temperature, while air heating systems compensate a lower
radiant temperature with a higher air temperature. The operative
temperature&mdash;a weighted average of both&mdash;can be the same. Source:, Richard Watson, 2008.

It should be noted that on earth, radiation always goes hand in hand
with convection. Because air has little mass, the radiant energy of the
sun doesn't heat the air directly. However, it does so indirectly. The
radiant energy of the sun is absorbed by the earth's surface, where it
is converted to heat. The warmer earth's surface then slowly releases
this heat to the air through the earlier described mechanisms of
conduction and convection. In other words, it's not the sun but the
earth's surface that heats the air on our planet.

The radiant temperature is equally important when heating a building, no
matter which heating system is used. Indoors, the radiant temperature
represents the total infrared radiation that is exchanged between all
surfaces in a room. Radiant heating systems, which we will discuss later
on, work in a similar manner as the sun: they don't heat the air but the
surfaces in a space, including human skin, raising the radiant
temperature and providing thermal comfort at a colder air temperature.
The use of radiant heating is more practical indoors, where
environmental factors are under control. If a wind picks up outside, for
example, the warming effect of the sun quickly
[disappears]({filename}/posts/circulating-fans-air-conditioning.md).

> It's not the sun but the earth's surface that heats the air on our
> planet

A 100% radiant heating system doesn't exist, because both the radiant
heating surface and the irradiated surfaces make contact with the air
and warm it by conduction and convection. However, this heating of the
air has a delayed onset and is more limited than in the case of a direct
air heating system. Likewise, an air heating system will also raise the
radiant temperature in a space, because the hot air warms the building's
surfaces through conduction. But again, the increase of the radiant
temperature is slow and limited in comparison to a radiant heating
system.

As with conduction, radiation can also make people uncomfortable in
spite of warm air temperature. If we are seated next to a cold window,
our body will radiate heat to this cold surface, making us feel cold
even when the air temperature is a comfortable 21ºC (70ºF). In short,
neither a high air temperature nor a high radiant temperature are a
guarantee of thermal comfort. The best understanding of the thermal
environment in a space is given by the "operative temperature", which is
a weighted average of both.

The Old Way of Warming

Before the arrival of central air heating systems in the twentieth
century, buildings were mainly heated by a central radiant heat source,
such as a fireplace or a wood, coal or gas stove. Usually, only one of
the rooms in a building was heated. But even within this room, there
were large differences in comfort depending on your exact location in
the space. While air heating distributes warmth relatively evenly
throughout an area, a radiant heating source creates a local
microclimate that can be radically different from the rest of the room.

This is because the energy potential of a radiant heat source decreases
with distance. It's not that the infrared waves become weaker, but that
they become more dispersed as they are fanning out from a specific
source. This is shown in the two illustrations below, which appear in
Richard Watson's "Radiant Heating and Cooling Handbook". The drawing on
the left shows the radiant heat distribution (or "radiant landscape") in
a room, seen from above, which is warmed by a forced-air heating system.
The average radiant temperature in the space is 20ºC (68ºF). Except for
the influence of a cold window surface (at the top of the illustration),
the radiant temperature is relatively constant throughout the room.

[![Contour plot of MRT gradients for forced-air heating system with
average room MRT of 20
degrees](http://krisdedecker.typepad.com/.a/6a00e0099229e8883301bb07b97926970d-350wi "Contour plot of MRT gradients for forced-air heating system with average room MRT of 20 degrees")](http://krisdedecker.typepad.com/.a/6a00e0099229e8883301bb07b97926970d-pi)[![Contour
plot of MRT gradients for radiant heating system with average room MRT
of 20
degrees](http://krisdedecker.typepad.com/.a/6a00e0099229e8883301bb07b97937970d-350wi "Contour plot of MRT gradients for radiant heating system with average room MRT of 20 degrees")](http://krisdedecker.typepad.com/.a/6a00e0099229e8883301bb07b97937970d-pi)

Source: *Radiant Heating and Cooling Handbook*. Richard Watson, 2008

The illustration on the right shows the same room, again with a mean
radiant temperature of 20ºC (68ºF), but now heated with a radiant heat
source which is located at the centre of the ceiling. It concerns an
electric longwave infrared panel, a new technology that we will explain
in the [second part of this
article]({filename}/posts/radiant-and-conductive-heating-systems.md),
but a fireplace in the middle of the room would give a similar result.
The radiant landscape is now very different. The highest radiant
temperature is measured in the middle of the room, right below the
heating panel. The radiant temperature then decreases rapidly in
concentric circles towards the sides of the room. The difference between
minimum and maximum radiant temperature is much larger than in the case
of an air heating system.

> In an air-heated room, it doesn't matter much where you are. In a room
> heated by a radiant heating source, location is everything.

Of course, a different location of the radiant heating surface, or a
combination of two or more radiant heating surfaces, would again present
a very different radiant landscape. Furthermore, as with solar
radiation, other objects can throw shadows, which means that even the
location of the furniture can have an effect on the heat distribution in
a room. Also note that the heterogeneous distribution of the radiant
temperature will be somewhat tempered by the homogeneous character of
the air temperature, no matter which heating system is being used.

Energy-Efficiency

In an air-heated room, it doesn't matter much where you are. In a room
heated by a central radiant heating source, location is everything. The
mean radiant temperature can be optimal, but the radiant temperature in
parts of the space may be too low. But the opposite is also possible:
the mean radiant temperature can be too low, while at certain locations
the room is perfectly comfortable. This is the ancient principle of spot
or zone heating, which is impossible to realize with an air heating
system. Instead of heating the entire space, our forefathers only heated
the occupied parts of a building.



Air heating (left) versus radiant heating (right) in a church building.
Source: [Fabric-friendly heating, Dario
Camuffo](http://www.buildingconservation.com/articles/fabric-friendly-heating/fabric-friendly-heating.htm).

A similar thing happens on the vertical plane. Warm air rises, so that
most heat ends up under the ceiling, where it is of little use. With
radiant heating, it's perfectly possible to only heat the lower part of
a space, no matter how high the ceiling is. Radiant heat doesn't rise,
unless the radiant heating surface is aimed upwards. In conclusion,
instead of heating the entire volume of air in a space, a radiant
heating system can heat only that part of a space which is occupied,
which is of course much more energy efficient.

Unless the room is very small or very crowded, only a very small part of
the energy used by an air heating system benefits people. On the other
hand, almost all the energy used by a radiant heating system is
effectively heating humans.

Local Insulation

A problem with the heterogeneous indoor climate of old times was radiant
assymetry&mdash;the difference in radiant temperature between distinct
parts of the body. A person sitting in front of an open fire will
receive sufficient radiant heat on one side of their body, while the
other side loses heat to the cold air and surfaces at the opposite half
of the room. The body can be in thermal balance&mdash;the heat loss on one
side equals the heat gain on the other&mdash;but if the temperature
differences are too large, thermal comfort will not be obtained.



A bench with adjustable backrest. Source: [Dictionnaire de l'ameublement
et de la décoration depuis le XIII
siècle](http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/bpt6k57648255), 1887-1890

The problem is illustrated on the engraving above. The back of the bench
could be switched from side to side. By regularly turning the body to
the fire and then away from it, both the front and the back of the body
could be heated alternately. Although radiant assymetry can be an issue
with forced-air heating systems, it's much more likely to appear in
spaces that are warmed by a a radiant heat source. In historical
buildings, the difference in surface temperatures was aggravated by the
fact that building surfaces were not insulated. Drafts, another cause of
local thermal discomfort, were also a problem in old buildings, because
they were anything but air-tight.

> To create a comfortable microclimate without radiant assymetry or
> draft, our forefathers supplemented local heating with local
> insulation

To create a comfortable microclimate without radiant assymetry or
drafts, our ancestors supplemented local heating with local. One example was the hooded chair. This chair, which could
be upholstered or covered with leather or wool blankets, fully exposed
people to a radiant heat source, while protecting their back from the
drafts and the low surface temperatures behind them.

At the same time, the shape of the furniture ensured that a greater
share of the radiant heat emitted by the fire was effectively used: the
chair was heated directly by the fire through radiation, and this heat
was transferred to the person sitting in it. Recent research has shown
that the insulation value of these types of chair amounted to at least
0.4 clo, which corresponds to the [insulation
value]({filename}/posts/body-insulation-thermal-underwear.md)
of a heavy pullover or coat. Some hooded chairs could host more than one
person.





Above: Hooded chairs from the nineteenth century. Sources: [Period Oak
Antiques](http://www.periodoakantiques.co.uk/antique-sales-archive/a-rare-18thc-elm-hooded-lambing-chair-with-box-seat-27-stockno-429/)
(left) and
[Polyvore](http://www.polyvore.com/buttoned_leather_chesterfield_porter_chair/thing?id=55242872)
(right). Below: A folding screen for winter use. Source: [Alain
Truong](http://elogedelart.canalblog.com/archives/2009/04/05/13277504.html).

An additional solution, which could also be used alone, was the folding
screen. The folding screens used as winter furniture were insulated with
fabrics or built with heavy wood panels. They could be placed behind an
insulated chair, or behind a table, for instance. Like the hooded chair,
the folding screen protected the back of a person against drafts and
cold temperatures, creating a comfortable microclimate.



Above: A sitting area close to the fireplace (Source: [The English
Fireplace](https://archive.org/details/cu31924015345139)). Below: A
four-poster bed (Source: [Wikipedia
Commons](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Four-poster_bed#mediaviewer/File:Four_Poster_Bed_350b.jpg)).

A third example of local insulation were special sitting areas close to
the fireplace. These could be benches placed between the fire and the
side walls of the fireplace, or a niche in the wall with a built-in
seat. In both cases, a person would lean against a wall that was warmed
by the fire and protected from drafts. In some cases, the fireplace
itself was placed in a room-inside-a-room. In the bedroom, which often
remained unheated, yet another piece of furniture was aimed at providing
a microclimate: the four poster bed, which had a canopy and thick
curtains. When the curtains were closed, drafts were eliminated and body
heat was trapped inside.

Portable Heating Systems

The apparent downside of spot heating is that you have to be in a
specific location in order to be comfortable. In earlier times, the
family gathered around the fireplace or the stove when no physical work
had to be done, or when the body had to be warmed up after a long stay
in a cold environment. Other locations in the room, as well as unheated
rooms, were better suited for activities which required a higher
metabolism. People were "migrating" throughout the room and throughout
the house in search of the climate that suited their needs best.

However, the use of radiant heat sources and local insulation were also
complemented by portable heating sources which transferred heat through
radiation, convection and/or conduction. These could be used to further
increase thermal comfort in the presence of a central heat source, and
were also helpful in bringing warmth to other locations. Portable
heating systems were designed especially to heat the feet or the hands:
the parts of the body that are most sensitive to cold.

> Personal heating sources allowed people to enjoy the heat from the
> central fireplace in unheated rooms, or even outside the house

An example is the foot stove, a box with one or more perforated
partitions, which contained a metal or earthenware bowl or pan filled
with embers from the fireplace. The feet were placed on top of the stove
and the often long garments worn in those days increased the effect of
the small heating device: the warmth was guided through a skirt or a
chamber coat along the legs to the upper body. The upper part of the
stove was made of wood or stone, as these materials have low thermal
conductivity to avoid burns.



Left: A Dutch foot stove ([Wikipedia
Commons](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Foot_stove#mediaviewer/File:Voetenstoof.jpg)).
Right: "[Young woman warming her
hands](http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Young_woman_warming_her_hands._Caesar_van_Everdingen.jpg)",
a painting by Caesar van Everdingen.

In many cultures worldwide, similar heat sources were used for warming
the hands. They were made from metal or ceramics and were filled with
embers from the fireplace, or with coal or
[peat]({filename}/posts/peat-and-coal-fossil-fuels-in-pre-industrial-times.md).
These personal heating sources also allowed people to enjoy the heat
from the central fireplace or stove outside the house. They were taken
in unheated coaches and railcars, or to Sunday Mass. Poor people made
use of heated stones or bricks, or even heated potatoes put in coat
pockets.

For heating the bed, people made use of brass bedpans with a long handle
which were shoved underneath the mattress. Some beds had a bed wagon: a
large, wooden frame designed to hold a pot of glowing fuel in the centre
of the bed. In the 19th century, following the arrival of the public
water supply, the use of ceramic hot water bottles became common --
water is a much safer heat medium than smouldering fire. These devices,
which were often protected by a fabric cover, were used as foot warmers,
hand warmers, or bed warmers.



An Afghan "Korsi". Source unknown.

Some peoples took the concept of the foot stove one level higher. The
Japanese had their "kotatsu", a movable low table with a charcoal heater
underneath. A thick cloth or quilt was placed over the table to trap the
heat and the whole family slid their legs under the table, sitting on
the floor. As with the European and American foot stoves, contemporary
clothing increased the effect of the device. The heat of the charcoal
burner was transferred through the traditional Japanese kimono, warming
the whole body. Similar heating devices were used in Afghanistan (such
as the "korsi"), as well as Iran, Spain and Portugal.

Conductive Heating Systems

Some historical radiant heating systems also transferred heat through
conduction, further improving efficiency and comfort. More than 3,000
years ago, the Chinese and the Koreans built heating systems which were
based on trapping smoke gases in a thermal mass. The northern Chinese
"kang" ("heated bed") was a raised platform made from stone, masonry or
adobe, which occupied about half of the room. As the name indicates, the
kang was in the first place a heated bed, but the platform was also used
during the day as a heated work and living space. The "dikang" ("warmed
floor"), which was typical in North-Eastern China, worked in the same
way as the kang, but had a larger floor area.



Above: a Chinese Kang, photographed in the 1920s. Source: [Wandering in
Northern
China](https://openlibrary.org/books/OL6658339M/Wandering_in_northern_China),
Harry A. Franck.

The Koreans used the "ondol" ("heated stone"), which was a wall-to-wall
platform. A similar heating system in Afghanistan, the "tawakhaneh"
("hot room") is possibly the oldest of these systems: its use may date
back 4,000 years. In all these systems, the heat of an open fire was led
underneath the platform to a chimney at the other side of the room. Both
the fireplace and the chimney could be in the room or in adjacent rooms.
The heat of the hot smoke gases was transferred to the thermal mass of
the platform, which slowly released the warmth to the space. Conduction
was as important as radiation and convection in the total heat transfer.



Above: [Blick in eine Schwarzwaldstube mit kleinem Mädchen auf der
Ofenbank](http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Georg_Saal_Schwarzwaldstube_1861.jpg),
a painting by Georg Saal, 1861. Below: ***[Auf dem
Ofen](http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Category:Tiled_stoves_in_art#mediaviewer/File:Auf_dem_Ofen_1895.jpg),
a painting by Albert Anker, 1895***

These ancient Eastern heating systems are somewhat reminiscent of the
European tile stoves that appeared in the middle ages. Tile stoves (or
"masonry heaters" as they are known in the USA) are [heat accumulating
wood stoves that make use of a high thermal mass to burn wood at very
high
temperatures]({filename}/posts/tile-stoves.md),
which is cleaner and more efficient. The smoke gases are trapped in a
labyrinth of smoke channels, transferring most of the heat to the
masonry structure before leaving the chimney.

Tile stoves produce a large share of radiant heat, but on top of this
they allow heat transfer through conduction, as many tile stoves had
built-in platforms to sit or sleep on. Even if these platforms were not
there, wooden benches were placed next to the stove so that one could
lean against the warm (but not too hot) surface.

Why We Also Need Modern Technology

In conclusion, all historic heating systems used radiation and/or
conduction as the primary modes of heat transfer, while convection was
merely a by-product. It makes good sense to return to this concept of
heating, but that doesn't mean that we have to go back to using
fireplaces and carrying burning embers around the house. While the old
concept of heating is more energy-efficient, the same cannot be said of
most of the old heating devices.

> While the old concept of heating is more energy efficient, the same
> cannot be said of most of the old heating devices.

Fireplaces, for one thing, are hugely inefficient, because most of the
heat escapes through the chimney. They also suck in large amounts of
cold air through cracks and gaps in the building envelope, which cools
the air indoors and introduces strong drafts. Owing to this, fireplaces
can even have negative efficiency as far as the air temperature is
concerned: they can make the room colder instead of warmer. Stoves do
better, but they remain relatively inefficient and have to be fired
regularly, just like a fireplace. And for both options, air pollution
can be substantial.

The (improved) tile stove is the only ancient heating system that can
still be recommended, but we have far more options now, such as electric
and hydronic radiant and conductive heating systems. These are more
efficient, more practical, and safer than the heating sources of
yesteryear. In the next two articles, we investigate [how the old way of
warming can be improved upon by modern
technology]({filename}/posts/radiant-and-conductive-heating-systems.md),
and [how much energy could be
saved]({filename}/posts/local-heating.md).

[Kris De Decker](http://www.krisdedecker.org) (edited by [Jenna
Collett](http://click.typepad.com/api/click?format=go&jsonp=vglnk_jsonp_14040698156716&key=7626aa89b5cdca8c8b5ad715622cd669&libId=d1fdef94-0fb9-4ef4-84a2-1dd653356ab1&loc=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.lowtechmagazine.com%2F2014%2F06%2Fthermal-efficiency-cooking-stoves.html&v=1&out=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.linkedin.com%2Fpub%2Fjenna-collett%2F1a%2F925%2Fb3&ref=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.lowtechmagazine.com%2F&title=LOW-TECH%20MAGAZINE%3A%20Well-Tended%20Fires%20Outperform%20Modern%20Cooking%20Stoves&txt=Jenna%20Collett))

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Sources (in order of importance):

-   [Stralingsverwarming: Gezonde Warmte met Minder
    Energie](http://www.eburon.nl/stralingsverwarming), Kris De Decker,
    2015
-   [Keeping Warm in a Cooler House. Creating Comfort with Background
    Heating and Local Supplementary
    Warmth](http://www.historic-scotland.gov.uk/technicalpaper14.pdf)
    (PDF). Historical Scotland Technical Paper 14, Michael Humphreys,
    Historic Scotland, 2011
-   [Radiant Heating and Cooling Handbook (Mcgraw-Hill
    Handbooks)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B00LVDVS8I/ref=as_li_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=B00LVDVS8I&linkCode=as2&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkId=WTF5AZV7AQ2ZW74T)![](http://ir-na.amazon-adsystem.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=as2&o=1&a=B00LVDVS8I){width="1"
    height="1"}, Richard Watson, 2008
-   [Human Thermal Environments: The Effects of Hot, Moderate, and Cold
    Environments on Human Health, Comfort, and Performance, Third
    Edition](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/146659599X/ref=as_li_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=146659599X&linkCode=as2&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkId=NMA5IA65R7XAKU3R)![](http://ir-na.amazon-adsystem.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=as2&o=1&a=146659599X){width="1"
    height="1"}", Ken Parsons, 2014
-   [The Book of Masonry Stoves: Rediscovering an Old Way of
    Warming](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/1890132098/ref=as_li_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=1890132098&linkCode=as2&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkId=ELXQCAXGMLF3WP5K)![](http://ir-na.amazon-adsystem.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=as2&o=1&a=1890132098){width="1"
    height="1"}, David Lyle, 1984
-   [History of radiant heating and cooling systems, part
    one](http://www.healthyheating.com/History_of_Radiant_Heating_and_Cooling/history_of_radiant_heating_Asia.htm#.VN36IS5W88I).
    Robert Bean, Bjarne W. Olesen, Kwang Woo Kim, in "ASHRAE Journal",
    January 2010, pp. 40-47
-   [Adaptive Thermal Comfort: Principles and
    Practice](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0415691591/ref=as_li_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0415691591&linkCode=as2&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkId=ALEQFIDNAT6TBHC5)![](http://ir-na.amazon-adsystem.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=as2&o=1&a=0415691591){width="1"
    height="1"}", Fergus Nicol, Michael Humphreys & Susan Roaf, 2012
-   [Dictionnaire de l'Ameublement et de la Décoration depuis le XIII
    siècle](http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/bpt6k57648255), Henry
    Havard, 1887-1890.
-   [Foot warmers: hot coals, hot
    water](http://www.homethingspast.com/foot-warmers/). Home Things
    Past.
-   [Bed warmers](http://www.oldandinteresting.com/bed-warmers.aspx).
    Old & Interesting.
-   [Muff warmers & other antique hand
    warmers](http://www.homethingspast.com/hand-warmers-muff-warmer/).
    Home Things Past.
-   [Körperwärmespender](http://www.koerper-waermespender.de/). Website.

Related Articles

-   [Radiant and Conductive Heating
    Systems]({filename}/posts/radiant-and-conductive-heating-systems.md)
-   [How to Keep Warm in a Cool
    House]({filename}/posts/local-heating.md)
-   [Fruit Walls: Urban Farming in the
    1600s]({filename}/posts/fruit-walls-urban-farming.md)
-   [The Revenge of the Ceiling
    Fan]({filename}/posts/circulating-fans-air-conditioning.md)
-   [Insulation: First the Body, then the
    Home]({filename}/posts/body-insulation-thermal-underwear.md)
-   [The Solar Envelope: How to Heat and Cool Cities without Fossil
    Fuels]({filename}/posts/solar-oriented-cities-1-the-solar-envelope.md)
-   [Don't Heat your Room with Tea
    Candles](http://www.notechmagazine.com/2014/11/dont-heat-your-room-with-tea-candles.html)

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
