Title: Wind powered factories: history (and future) of industrial windmills
Date: 2009-10-08 13:12
Author: Kris De Decker
Category: Obsolete Technology
Tags: windmills
Slug: history-of-industrial-windmills
Status: published



In the 1930s and 1940s, decades after steam engines had made wind power
obsolete, Dutch researchers obstinately kept improving the – already
very sophisticated – traditional windmill. The results were spectacular,
and there is no doubt that today an army of ecogeeks could improve them
even further. Would it make sense to revive the industrial windmill and
again convert kinetic energy directly into mechanical energy?



The Netherlands had 5 times more windmills in 1850 than it has wind
turbines today



Article also available in
[French](http://sniadecki.wordpress.com/2014/09/21/ltm-moulins-a-vent/)
&
[Spanish](http://www.es.lowtechmagazine.com/2011/08/pasado-y-futuro-de-los-molinos-de-viento-industriales.html).

More than 900 years ago, medieval Europe became the first large
civilisation not to be run by human muscle power. Thousands and
thousands of windmills and waterwheels, backed up by animal power,
transformed industry and society radically. It was an industrial
revolution entirely powered by renewable energy – something that we can
(and do) only dream of today. Wind and water powered mills were in
essence the first real factories in human history. They consisted of a
building, a power source, machinery and employees, and out of them came
a product.

Windmills and waterwheels were not new technologies – both machines
appeared already in Antiquity and the ones used in the early Middle Ages
were technically no different from those. However, ancient civilisations
like the Greeks and the Romans hardly used them, possibly because of
religious reasons and because of a large enough reservoir of human slave
labour.

Water versus wind

Water powered mills were – overall – more important and numerous than
windmills. This is logical since they are a simpler and more reliable
technology; the flow of a river might change according to the seasons,
but generally a river always contains water. Moreover, by making use of
canals and sluice gates the flow of water could be precisely controlled
to provide the speed or load required by the gearwork inside the
factory.



The wind, on the other hand, does not always blow. When it does, wind
velocity and direction can change at any moment and windmills had no
efficient method to control the strength of the wind – at least not in
early medieval times. Water powered mills appeared in Europe in large
amounts from the end of the 11th century onwards and only 200 years
later almost all available energy in rivers and streams was put to
use.However, not all regions were suited for watermills. The reasons
could be that they did not have sufficient water resources (like Spain),
that they were too flat and their rivers did not have enough flow (like
the Netherlands and the downlands of England) or that rivers generally
froze during winter (like in Scandinavia, Russia and parts of Germany).
In these countries, windmills appeared in the 13th century, possibly
earlier, and spread fast. Later, also regions that had abundant water
resources constructed windmills, to relieve the pressure on rivers and
streams.

How many windmills?


amount of windmills in early medieval times remains unknown, because the
few inventories that could be studied do not distinguish between water
and wind powered mills. For instance, we know that there were between
10,000 and 12,000 mills in the UK in 1300, but we do not know how many
of them were wind powered (it must have been a minority). All we have
are data on individual windmills, which start to appear at the end of
the 1200s. Only in the 1700s and 1800s, when windmill technology really
caught on, more accurate inventories appear. In 1750, there were 6,000
to 8,000 windmills in the Netherlands, in 1850 there were 9,000 of them.
For comparison, this is almost 5 times as much as there are wind
turbines in the Netherlands today (1,974 turbines as of September 2009).
In the UK there were 5,000 to 10,000 windmills in 1820. France had 8,700
windmills (and 37,000 watermills) in 1847.



Germany had 18,242 windmills in 1895 (compared to around 18,000 wind
turbines today) and Finland had 20,000 windmills in 1900. Portugal,
Spain, several Mediterranean islands and many Eastern European and
Scandinavian countries had many windmills, too.

The total amount of wind powered mills in Europe was estimated to be
around 200,000 (at its peak), compared to some 500,000 waterwheels.
Windmills were built in the countryside and in cities, and even on the
walls of castles and fortifications in order to catch more
wind.Initially, the only applications of windmills were the grinding of
grain and (to a lesser extent) the pumping of water and the draining of
lowland areas (for which they were connected to a waterwheel working in
reverse – the
[scoopwheel](http://www.nt.ntnu.no/users/haugwarb/DropBox/The%20Dutch%20Windmill%20Stokhuyzen%201962_files/wm7.gif)
- or to an [Archimedean
screw](http://www.nt.ntnu.no/users/haugwarb/DropBox/The%20Dutch%20Windmill%20Stokhuyzen%201962_files/wm11.gif)).



Around 1600, many new industrial applications of windmills appeared: saw
mills, paper mills, mustard mills, tobacco mills, ...



Bread and oats were the staple diet of the Middle Ages (meat, fish and
vegetables were only available to the rich) and all that grain had to be
crushed or ground. It took one person with a hand mill two hours a day
to grind enough flour for an average family. Corn windmills were also
used to make Dutch gin and other liquors.

The grinding of grain remained the most important use of windmills - as
late as 1900, the entire wheat harvest of Northern Europe was ground by
windmills in the Netherlands, Denmark and Germany. However, around 1600
many new applications of windmills appeared.

New applications

Windmills were used for hulling barley and rice, grinding malt, pressing
olives to olive oil, and pressing coleseed, linseed, rapeseed and
hempseed for cooking and lighting. There were also cocoa mills, mustard
mills and pepper mills (also used for other spices), even tobacco mills
and snuff mills.



Besides food production, two other major applications of windmill
technology were the production of paper (using ropes and sails from
ships as a raw material) and the sawing of wood. Windmills were also
crushing chalk (to make cement), grinding mortar, draining mines,
ventilating mineshafts (and even a prison), polishing glass and making
gunpowder.

Textiles were another industry in which wind power came to the rescue:
windmills were crushing seeds from flax (to make linen), preparing hemp
fibres (to produce ropes and sailcloth), fulling cloth (to create soft
wool), making paint and tanning and dying animal skins.The Zaan
districtOne of the most spectacular developments of industrial wind
power technology occurred in the Zaan district, a region situated just
above Amsterdam in the Netherlands. Although the area is surrounded by
water, the potential of water power was limited because the land is as
flat as it can be and so the flow of the rivers is low. The wind, on the
other hand, is strong. Many of the applications of windmills described
above appeared first (and sometimes only) in the Zaan district.



It is said that the region was the world’s first industrialized area.
From 1600 to 1750, when the Netherlands became an important economical
power, around 1,000 windmills were built and operated here (see the map
on the left). Mills were given names, just like ships.A vital element of
the wind powered industry in the Zaan district was the saw mill. Wood
was required to construct houses, sluices, ships and of course more
windmills. Hand sawing was a very laborious task and windmills greatly
reduced the time needed for the process. With hand sawing, 60 beams or
trunks would take 120 working days, with wind power this only took 4 to
5 days (see picture below, more
[here](http://penterbak.nl/eenhoornzagen.html)).

The first sawmill ("Het juffertje" or "The missy") was built in the town
of Zaandam by Cornelis Corneliszoon in 1596. By 1630, there were 83
sawmills north of Amsterdam, of which 53 were located in the Zaan
district. The peak was reached in 1731 when there were 450 sawmills in
the Netherlands, 256 of them in the Zaan district. Eventually even the
crane of these mills, to haul up the timber, was driven by the sails.

Another early industrial application of wind power in the Zaan district
was the production of paper – this was, after all, the era in which the
printing press appeared. The first papermaking windmill ("De Gans" or
"The Goose") dates from 1605 and by 1740 there were 40 of them. In the
middle of the 17th century, the Dutch paper mill was substantially
improved, which enabled it to make whiter paper and make it faster.



One remaining example is “De Schoolmeester” ("The Teacher"), built in
1692 (see the introductory picture and the interior below). Wind powered
paper mills were rare in other countries, but water powered versions
already appeared in the 11th century and became quite common – in
England there were 417 of them in 1800.



In saw mills, even the crane to haul up the timber was driven by the
sails



Other remarkable windmills in the Zaan district were snuff and tobacco
mills (38 in 1795), oil mills (140 in 1731), barley hulling mills (65 in
1731), dyestuff mills (21 in 1731) and hemp mills (20 in 1731). The
Dutch also built hundreds of windmills in the West Indies for crushing
sugar cane. Relatively few of the 1,000 surviving windmills in the
Netherlands are industrial windmills - drainage and corn mills remained
economically viable much longer.



Backup power: animalsIn many other European countries, similar functions
were mainly performed by watermills. However, not all activities powered
by waterwheels could be powered by sails. The fickleness of the wind
made windmills unsuited for processes that required a very steady and
reliable power output, like metal making, spinning, tool-sharpening or
extracting minerals from mines.

In countries where the potential of water power was insufficient, some
of these activities were powered by animals, mainly horses. Horses were
also used as a backup power in long periods of calm, in order to
guarantee delivery. For instance, in the Netherlands in 1850, there were
1,800 windmills for the grinding of corn, but also 1,300 horsemills for
the grinding of buckwheat – a grain that required a more steady power
source for
grinding.
Post mills and tower millsEarly medieval windmills were simple machines,
derived from waterwheels. During the following centuries, however,
windmills became a very sophisticated technology. Windmills are much
more complicated machines than waterwheels because wind velocity and
speed change continually. Earlier windmills in Iran and Afghanistan were
of the [horizontal (vertical-axis)
type](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lhjww8FBsZk), and thus did not have
to adapt to changes in wind direction. But these machines, which were
much less efficient, were never used in Europe.


Initially, medieval millwrights solved the problem of varying wind
direction by positioning the whole mill on a central spindle so that it
could be turned to face the wind. This was the so-called “post mill” (at
right). Around the 1400s, a second type of windmill appeared, in which
only the cap and sails rotated and the body of the mill remained
stationary. This was the so-called “tower mill”, which was later
perfected by the Dutch (see the diagram on the left).

Tower mills were also the dominant type around the Mediterranean, but
these were less efficient machines with very different sails. Because it
was stationary, the main body of a tower mill could be constructed from
stone or brick, and thus they were more sturdily built. Both types
continued to be in use, but many post mills were replaced by tower mills
from the 1600s to the 1800s.

Turning the sails into the wind

These days, wind turbines are turned into the wind automatically by
means of electronic equipment. When the wind becomes too strong, the
electronics turn the blades out of the wind so they are not blown to
smithereens. Medieval millwrights had no
[microchips]({filename}/posts/embodied-energy-of-digital-technology.md)
and so they had to find another solution.



For many centuries, windmills were turned into the wind by mere muscle
power. This was done by lifting a large tailpole at the back of the mill
(hooked up to the tail ladder in the case of a post mill), moving it to
the required position, and fixing it again at one of the twelve anchor
posts sunk into the ground in a circle around the mill. This was not an
easy task, because the body of a post mill had to be turned with the
weight of all the machinery inside. Some mills were equipped with a
winch at the end of the tailpole, riding on a circular track, which made
the task a bit easier. The cap of tower mills was turned in a similar
fashion, by means of a much longer tailpole - reaching to the ground
(picture above) or to the terrace in the case of a tower mill with a
stage
([here](http://nl.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bestand:Molen_De_Hoop_Appel_kruilier.jpg)).
Vent holes were drilled in the sides of the body of the mill – when the
wind started blowing through one of these holes, the miller knew that
wind direction had changed.

Adjusting the sails: a daunting task

Adapting to variations in wind velocity was even more challenging. The
factory machinery inside the mill required a rather precise operating
speed. For instance, corn mills worked best at 50 to 60 sail revolutions
per minute. Once surpassing 80 sail revolutions per minute the grain
would burn. Another risk was that when sails started turning too fast,
the windmill could be destroyed.

Again, for centuries, the miller had to do this by hand. Basically,
there were two ways to adjust to changing wind speeds. Minor differences
in wind velocity could be absorbed inside the mill, by increasing or
decreasing the load. For instance, in a corn mill, adapting to a higher
wind speed could be done by widening the gap between the milling stones
and adding more grain. Because the load is increased, the amount of
revolutions of the sails remains more or less the same in spite of the
higher wind speed.



When the changes in wind speed became too large, however, the miller had
no choice but to get out of the mill and adjust the sails. Traditional
windmills were not equipped with blades, but with sails – mostly a
wooden framework covered with canvas (in colder climates the canvas was
generally replaced by slats of wood, which were easier to handle in
freezing conditions).

Reefing two or even four sails, or reducing sail area were very
effective methods to adjust to higher wind speeds, but these must have
been daunting tasks in high winds. At least two sails had to be brought
within a vertical position and stopped so that the miller, climbing the
sail, could take off the cloth. If the brake failed while the miller was
in the sail, he would be in for a spectacular ride. Tying and reefing
all four sails was also a standard procedure at the beginning and end of
each working day.



During the second half of the eighteenth century, several complex but
effective techniques were developed that made it possible for a
traditional windmill to be left mostly unattended



During the second half of the eighteenth century, several complex but
effective techniques were developed that made it possible for a
traditional wind mill to be left mostly unattended, at least when it
concerned changes in wind speed and direction. In 1745, the English
blacksmith Edmund Lee invented the "self-regulating wind machine" or
"winding", a device that automatically adapted the positioning of the
windmill to the direction of the wind. It consisted of a fantail (two
fantails for larger windmills) and a gearwork (illustration below).



A fantail can be described as an auxiliary windmill that is mounted
behind the main sails, at a right angle to them. If the direction of the
wind changes, it hits the fantail, turning the mill until the main sails
are again perpendicular to the wind.


The fantail is geared down to a travelling wheel in the cap of the tower
(in case of a tower mill, above) or around the building (in case of a
post mill, see [picture](http://www.geograph.org.uk/photo/149649)).
Fantails were later used for wind-powered water pumps in the US, but
because these machines were much lighter there was no need for a
gearwork to turn them.

The winding not only made the handling of the mill much easier, it also
augmented the power output. A substantial amount of power can get lost
because of slight variations in the wind direction, but the miller did
not always have the time (or the will) to turn the windmill following
every minor change. Automatic control: spring and patent sails


Around the same time as the fantail and winding were invented,
mechanisms started to appear that were aimed at automatically adapting
the sails to varying wind speeds. This led to the development of the
so-called “spring-sail” in 1772, invented by Scottish millwright Andrew
Meikle. On a spring sail, the sailcloth is replaced by dozens of
shutters like those of a Venetian blind. Each shutter is controlled by a
spring.


As the wind increases, it overcomes the force of the spring and the
shutter will open, letting the wind through and slowing down the sails.
The stronger the wind, the more the shutters will open. When the wind
speed decreases, the shutters will be closed by the spring, again
forming one uninterrupted surface. All of this results in having sails
with a similar rotation speed at any wind velocity.

The problem with spring-sails is that the tensions of the springs (which
are all connected to each other by means of a long pole) have to be
adjusted beforehand depending on the expected wind speed and the power
needed. Once set, it is impossible to make adjustments while the sails
are turning.


This was solved in 1789 by Stephen Hooper, who introduced blinds that
could be adjusted with a manual chain from the ground without stopping
the mill ("roller reefing sails", picture on the right). However, the
system was too complicated. The final improvement to self-reefing sails
came in 1807 when William Cubit attached counterweights to the
adjustment chain of spring sails, making the control of the sails fully
automatic without the complexity of the roller reefing method – these
were called “[patent
sails](http://www.shipleywindmill.org.uk/images/jc162.jpg)” (drawing
above).

Berton sails

The only problem left was that patent sails had a lower efficiency than
normal sails, and as a result it was common to combine two patent sails
with two normal sails as a compromise between handling and efficiency.
In 1848, the Frenchman Berton replaced the many small shutters by fewer
longitudinal shutters operating according to the same principle, an
intriguing method that gave a sturdier construction and a better
aerodynamic performance ("[Berton
Sails](http://www.moulins-a-vent.net/Moulins/cercles.htm)", see picture
below).

Moreover, the system could be adjusted by the miller from inside the cap
of the mill. In 1860, Catchpole introduced air brakes, which were a very
effective means to automatically slowing down the sails in a gale.
Inside the mill, an automatic centrifugal governor replaced the manual
adapting of the distance between the milling stones.

Of course, self-reefing sails and other automatic systems did not solve
the problem of windless days - that is why the miller worked day and
night when there was a good breeze. Millers were even exempt from
Sunday's rest.



As was the case with the fantail, self-reefing sails did not only
improve the handling of the windmill, but also the power output. Because
there was no longer a need for the miller to stand on the ground to fix
or unfurl the sails, the wind shaft could be installed much higher so
that the mill could benefit from higher wind speeds (the Dutch had
solved this issue before by constructing tower mills where the sails
could be reefed from a stage at a higher level).

Power output of a windmill

Another important improvement was the introduction of cast iron for the
manufacture of the gearwork. This happened in 1755, only ten years after
the introduction of the winding, by John Smeaton. For centuries, all
gears inside the mill were made of wood. This resulted in serious energy
losses.

Measurements performed by the Dutch in the 1930s, on a drainage windmill
constructed in 1648, showed that the mill generated around 40 horsepower
at the windshaft but only 15.6 horsepower at the machines – an
efficiency of only 39 percent. Almost two thirds of the generated power
was lost in the transmission. Drainage mills had a slightly higher
efficiency of around 50 percent.



Windmills with wood gearings had an efficiency of only 39 percent



The use of cast-iron (and later iron) did not only improve the
efficiency of the gearwork, but also allowed for the construction of
larger windmills. The use of wood limited the diameter of the sails to
around 30 meters – already common in the 1600s.



The maximum length of a stock (more than twice the length of one sail)
was around 30 metres (100 feet) because there were no larger trunks
available. Only in the second half of the nineteenth century iron stocks
came to be used for the sails and for the windshaft.

Innovations came too late

Unfortunately, the many important improvements of windmill technology
came too late. Already at the end of the 1700s, around the same time
that these innovations appeared, the first corn mill switched from wind
power to steam power – and to the black smoke that came with it. Around
1850, steam powered mills became more common and the importance of
windmills started to decline. To make things worse, fantails,
self-reefing sails and iron stiffening were slow to catch on - in many
countries and regions they were never even used.


sails were only applied in France, patent sails were mainly used in
England. Although iron stocks allowed for the construction of larger
sails, that never happened. The highest tower mill ever constructed was
made entirely out of wood. It was standing in the Netherlands and was
constructed in 1899 ("De Hoop" or "The Hope" in Prinsenhagen, now the
city of Breda). It stood 38 metres (125 ft) tall, with sails around 27
metres (88.5 ft) in diameter. The cap and sails were removed in 1929 but
the tower is still there.

Largest windmill ever built

The two Dutch windmills with the largest sail diameter are standing in
the [Golden Gate Park in San
Francisco](http://www.windmillworld.com/world/california.htm), built
between 1903 and 1905. The largest one, the "Murphy Windmill", stands 29
metres (95 ft) tall with sails 35 metres (114 ft) across. The stocks
were cut from one single log - the US had larger trees. But its gearwork
is made entirely of cast iron and that shows: the mill pumped up to
150,000 litres (40,000 gallons) of water per day to irrigate the park.
The Murphy Mill was replaced by an electrical engine some years later
and fell into disrepair.

The decline of the windmill was slow, especially in the Netherlands -
the Dutch even preferred windmills with [auxiliary steam
engines](http://www.notechmagazine.com/2009/04/hybrid-windmill.html)
over fully steam powered mills. More than 6 million wind powered
waterpumps (with annular sails) would be built in the United States
between the 1850s and the 1930s, but elsewhere few windmills were
erected after 1900. The attention shifted to wind turbines generating
electricity, and that has remained so ever since.Impressive improvements
in the 1920s and 1930sIn the 1920s and 1930s, however, when windmills
had stopped working almost everywhere in Europe, the Dutch started a
research program that led to the final development of the classical
windmill. In 1923, the “Dutch Windmill Society” was founded, with the
mission to improve the performance of windmills generating mechanical
energy. Among the members were famous millwright builders like the
Dekker Brothers. The results were spectacular.



The maximum power output of a windmill was doubled from 50 to 100
horsepower at the end of the 1920s



Through the application of aeronautical principles and the use of sheet
metal (basically equipping traditional windmills with sails somewhat
similar to the blades of modern wind turbines) the maximum power output
of a windmill was doubled from 50 to 100 horsepower at the end of the
1920s.


than 70 windmills were equipped with the new "Dekkerized sails" during
the following decade. Moreover, improvements in the gearwork slashed
energy losses and allowed for windmills to generate much more power at
lower wind speeds.

Doubling energy output


conducted in 1939 by the “Prinsenmolen Committee” showed that an
improved windmill would start to turn with a wind speed of 3.5 to 4 m/s
(7.75 to 9 mph) compared to 5 to 6 m/s (11 to 13.5 mph) for the old
design. At 5.5 m/s (12.5 mph) their power was found to be equal to that
of a normal mill at 8 m/s (18 mph).

This meant that while a traditional windmill could be worked for around
2,671 hours per year in the Netherlands, the new streamlined design
could be operated for 4,442 hours per year – more or less doubling the
annual energy output.

The improved windmill had two advantages; a greater output at a given
wind speed, and longer working hours by utilizing lighter winds. The
gain was especially found in lower wind speeds, because with stronger
winds the sails of the improved windmill had to be reefed sooner.


improvements during the 1930s by Chris van Bussel, Kurt Bilau, G.J. Ten
Have, Van Riet, P.L. Fauël (picture right), Sabinin and Yurieff led to a
windmill, installed in 1940 and demolished in 1960, with up to two and a
half times the power output of windmills with traditional sails: 125
horsepower.

Next, the Second World War stopped further investigations and after the
war, like the rest of the world, the Dutch shifted their attention to
the generation of electricity.

Revert to traditional windmills?

Today, windmills and waterwheels that convert kinetic energy directly
into mechanical energy are considered obsolete, and while some have
survived, few of them have any commercial function in developed
countries. Wind turbines now turn renewable energy into electricity,
which might later be converted back to mechanical energy.

Of course it is impossible to operate a flat screen television or a
laptop with mechanical energy, but many other processes could in
principle still be driven in that old-fashioned way. Grain still has to
be ground, wood still has to be sawn, seeds still have to be pressed,
but now we use electricity to drive machines that perform the same
processes. This electricity can be generated by means of modern wind
turbines, or other renewable energy sources, and that is the future that
everybody has in mind.

Embodied energy

However, there are some reasons that might make it interesting to revert
to a direct conversion from kinetic to mechanical energy. For one thing,
it is more efficient because the intermediate step of generating
electricity [causes conversion
losses]({filename}/posts/bike-powered-electricity-generators.md).
This means that we have to build less renewable energy plants to get the
same work done. Planting a few million high-tech wind turbines, covering
deserts with [solar
plants]({filename}/posts/the-ugly-side-o.md) and
developing a smart grid all sound attractive, but the most important
question is whether there are enough material, energy and financial
resources available to make those dreams ever come true.



Traditional windmills could be improved substantially with today’s
knowledge and materials



Available data on the reserves of exotic resources required for many
eco-technologies [look grim](http://www.notechmagazine.com/resources/),
and some time ago it was heard that China (the main producer of
important ecotech metals) plans to
[restrict](http://www.energybulletin.net/50020) the export of those
metals. Windmills that convert kinetic energy directly to mechanical
work could be operated without exotic materials.

High-tech traditional windmillsOn a more positive note, traditional
windmills could be improved substantially with today’s knowledge and
fairly common materials. The gearings and sails could be made of steel
or aluminum, which would seriously improve efficiency and also make
windmills fireproof. Being made entirely or in large part of wood, many
windmills were destroyed by fire. Of course, also the factory machinery
inside the mill could be made much more efficient now.



Windmills could be built much larger and thus more powerful. To give an
indication; in 2005, the Dutch built another traditional windmill, that
generates electricity - the
"[Noletmolen](http://www.molendatabase.nl/nederland/molen.php?nummer=1280)"
in Schiedam. It stands almost 42 metres tall with sails 30 metres
across, slightly less than the Murphy Mill in San Francisco. It was
built for promotional purposes by a distillery (the town hosts 5 more
historical mills built to produce Dutch gin). Although the mill is not
really a "mill", it is built according to a traditional design, but
using high-tech materials and sails (picture above). The result is a
power output of more than 200 horsepower at the windshaft. Take that,
[Energy
Ball]({filename}/posts/small-windmills-test-results.md).


Ecotech treatment

Backup power for a traditional windmill could be delivered by an
electrical motor instead of horses (or we could just work when the wind
blows). There is no doubt that now, 70 years later, an army of ecotech
geeks could still seriously improve the Dutch experiments from the
1930s. The results might not look as romantic as a traditional windmill,
but very useful.

Of course, this is not a plea to eliminate electricity-generating wind
turbines or even the electricity infrastructure altogether. But, some
things might be more efficiently done with direct conversion of kinetic
energy to mechanical energy.

We will dive deeper into the history of renewable energy in [forthcoming
articles](http://feeds2.feedburner.com/typepad/krisdedecker/lowtechmagazineenglish).

© Kris De Decker (edited by Vincent Grosjean)



  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
   
   
   
   
 ------------------------------------------------------------------------



Sources (in order of importance)

-   "[Power from Wind: A History of Windmill
    Technology](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/052156686X?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=052156686X)![](http://www.assoc-amazon.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=as2&o=1&a=052156686X){width="1"
    height="1"}", Richard L. Hills, 1994.
-   "Molens", Frederick Stokhuyzen, 1962 (English summary
    [here](http://www.nt.ntnu.no/users/haugwarb/DropBox/The%20Dutch%20Windmill%20Stokhuyzen%201962.htm)).
-   "[Research inspired by the Dutch windmills: An account of an
    extensive programme of research and
    development](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B0000EGOO0?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=B0000EGOO0)![](http://www.assoc-amazon.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=as2&o=1&a=B0000EGOO0){width="1"
    height="1"}", The Prinsenmolen Committee, 1966 (*I could not find
    this book but it is the source to which both books above refer to
    when describing the Dutch experiments in the 1930s*).
-   "Histoire générale des techniques", Maurice Dumas, 1964
-   "[Molendatabase](http://www.molendatabase.nl)" – pictures and
    descriptions (in Dutch) of windmills in the Netherlands.
-   "[Natural sources of
    power](http://www.archive.org/details/naturalsourcesp00ballgoog)",
    Robert Steele Ball (1908)
-   "[Geschiedenis van de techniek in Nederland, de wording van een
    moderne samenleving
    1800-1890](http://www.dbnl.org/tekst/lint011gesc01_01/lint011gesc01_01_0003.htm)",
    H.W. Lintsen, 1992
-   "[Gevlucht](http://nl.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gevlucht)", Wikipedia Dutch
-   "History of technology", "Energy conversion" and "Windmills",
    [Encyclopedia Britannica](http://www.britannica.com/).
-   "[An Encyclopedia of the History of Technology (Routledge Companion
    Encyclopaedias)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0415147921?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0415147921)![](http://www.assoc-amazon.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=as2&o=1&a=0415147921){width="1"
    height="1"}", Ian McNeil, 1990
-   "[Wind, Water, Work: Ancient And Medieval Milling Technology
    (Technology and Change in
    History)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/9004146490?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=9004146490)![](http://www.assoc-amazon.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=as2&o=1&a=9004146490){width="1"
    height="1"}", Adam Lucas, 2005
-   "[Handbook of Fluid
    Dynamics](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0849325099?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0849325099)![](http://www.assoc-amazon.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=as2&o=1&a=0849325099){width="1"
    height="1"}", Richard W. Johnson, 1998
-   "[The windmill as prime
    mover](http://www.archive.org/details/windmillasaprim00wolfgoog)",
    Alfred R. Wolff, 1885
-   "[An experimental enquiry concerning the natural powers of water and
    wind to turn
    mills](http://www.archive.org/details/anexperimentale00smeagoog)",
    John Smeaton, 1760
-   "Groot Volkomen Moolenboek", 1734
-   "[Penterbak](http://www.penterbak.nl/)" - pictures
-   "[Industriemolens](http://www.industriemolens.nl/)" - pictures of
    industrial windmills in the Netherlands
-   "[Windmills in
    Sussex](http://theweald.org/bk.asp?BookId=wind900&xid=A&xnm=1)",
    Peter Hemming, 1936
-   "[Windmills in
    Holland](http://ia311321.us.archive.org/2/items/WindmillsInHolland/WIH2.pdf)", K.
    Boonenburg, 1951 (pdf)
-   "[Windmill sail](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Windmill_sail)",
    Wikipedia English
-   "[Origen y expansion de los molinos de viento en
    Espana](http://www.scielo.org.ve/scielo.php?pid=S0378-18442005000600004&script=sci_arttext)”,
    José Ignacio Rojas Sola y Juan Manual Amezcua Ogayar, Interciencia,
    Vol.30, 2005
-   "[The windmill: a medieval steam
    engine?](http://www.lse.ac.uk/collections/economicHistory/Epstein%20Memorial%20Conference/PAPER-Langdon.pdf)",
    John Langdon (pdf)
-   "[The Evolution of Technology (Cambridge Studies in the History of
    Science](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0521296811?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0521296811)[)](http://www.lowtechmagazine.be/2009/05/testresultaten-kleine-windturbines.html)",
    George Basalla, 1989
-   "Windkraftanlagen: grundlagen, technik, einsatz,
    wirtschaftlichkeit", Eric Hau, 2003
-   "[European Route of Industrial
    Heritages](http://www.erih.net/welcome.html)"



Related articles:



-   [Medieval
    smokestacks]({filename}/posts/peat-and-coal-fossil-fuels-in-pre-industrial-times.md):
    windmills are only half of the story
-   [Back to
    basics]({filename}/posts/direct-hydropower.md):
    direct hydropower
-   [Pedal powered farms and
    factories]({filename}/posts/pedal-powered-farms-and-factories.md):
    the perfect backup solution for wind power
-   [The bright future of solar powered
    factories]({filename}/posts/solar-powered-factories.md):
    we need a renewable source of heat energy
-   [The solar
    envelope]({filename}/posts/solar-oriented-cities-1-the-solar-envelope.md):
    how to heat and cool cities without fossil fuels
-   [The mechanical transmission of
    power (1)]({filename}/posts/mechanical-transmission-of-power-stangenkunst.md):
    Stangenkunst
-   [The mechanical transmission of
    power (2)]({filename}/posts/the-mechanical-transmission-of-power-jerker-line-systems.md):
    jerker line systems
-   [The mechanical transmission of
    power (3)]({filename}/posts/the-mechanical-transmission-of-power-3-wire-ropes.md):
    endless rope drives
-   [Scale models of Dutch industrial
    windmills](http://www.notechmagazine.com/2009/10/scale-models-of-traditional-dutch-windmills.html):
    build them yourself
-   [Boat
    mills]({filename}/posts/boat-mills-bridge-mills-and-hanging-mills.md):
    water powered, floating factories
-   [Cargo ships, then and
    now]({filename}/posts/sailing-ships-large-crew-automated-control.md):
    which one is fastest?
-   [Human powered cranes & lifting
    devices]({filename}/posts/history-of-human-powered-cranes.md)
-   [How to downsize a transport
    network]({filename}/posts/the-chinese-wheelbarrow.md):
    the Chinese wheelbarrow
-   [Fruit walls: urban solar farming in the
    1600s]({filename}/posts/fruit-walls-urban-farming.md)

[Main page](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/).



  

  

  

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
