Title: The sky is the limit: human powered cranes and lifting devices
Date: 2010-03-25 16:13
Author: Kris De Decker
Category: Obsolete Technology
Tags: cranes, derricks, gothic cathedrals, hoists, human power, lifting devices, pedal power, treadmill, treadmills, treadwheel, treadwheel crane, treadwheels
Slug: history-of-human-powered-cranes
Status: published



From the earliest civilisations right up to the start of the Industrial
Revolution, humans used sheer muscle power, organisation skills and
ingenious mechanics to lift weights that would be impossible to handle
by most power cranes in operation today.



The most powerful hand crane in history multiplied the force of its
operator 632 times



The most common tower crane used in construction today has a lifting
capacity of some 12 to 20 tonnes. For quite a few construction projects
in ancient history, this type of crane would be completely inadequate.


majority of stones that make up the almost 140 discovered Egyptian
pyramids have a weight of "only" 2 to 3 tonnes each, but all of these
structures (built between 2750 and 1500 BC) also hold stone blocks
weighing 50 tonnes, sometimes more. The temple of Amon-Ra at Karnak
contains a labyrinth of 134 columns, standing 23 metres (75 feet) tall
and supporting crossbeams weighing 60 to 70 tonnes each. The 18 capital
blocks of Trajan's column in Rome weigh more than 53 tonnes and they
were lifted to a height of 34 metres (111 feet). The Roman Jupiter
temple in Baalbek contains stone blocks weighing over 100 tonnes, raised
to a height of 19 metres (62 feet). Today, to lift a weight of 50 to 100
tonnes to these heights, you need a crane like
[this](http://www.liebherr.com/cc/en/products_cc.asp?menuID=106087%2112534-0).

Occasionally, our forefathers lifted even heavier stones. The gravestone
of Theoderic the Great in Ravenna (around 520 AD) is a 275 tonne stone
block that was lifted to a height of 10 metres. The temple dedicated to
Pharaoh Khafre in Egypt is made up of monolithic blocks weighing up to
425 tonnes. The largest Egyptian obelisk weighed more than 500 tons and
stands more than 30 metres tall, while the largest obelisk in the
Kingdom of Axum in Ethiopia (4th century AD), raised up to a similar
height, weighed 520 tonnes. The Colossi of Memnon, two statues of 700
tonnes each, were erected to a height of 18 metres and the walls in the
Roman Baalbek temple complex (1st century BC) contain almost 30
monoliths weighing 300 to 750 tons each.


Only the most powerful contemporary cranes could handle stones of this
weight (see the picture on the left, [specifications
here](http://www.liebherr.com/at/en/products_at.asp?menuID=106082%218607-0)).

Raising construction materials to impressive heights seemed to be no
problem either. The Alexandria lighthouse (3rd century BC) stood more
than 76 metres (250 feet) tall. The Egyptian pyramids rise up to 147
metres. During the Middle Ages some 80 large cathedrals and around 500
large churches were built with a height of up to 160 metres - out of
reach for all but the most recent [top model crawler
cranes](http://www.liebherr.com/cr/en/default_cr.asp) (picture above,
right).Human lifting power


the type of cranes that would be needed today, one wonders how our
forefathers were able to lift such impressive weights without the help
of sophisticated machinery. The fact is, they *had* advanced machinery
at their disposal. The only difference with contemporary cranes is that
these machines were powered by humans instead of fossil fuels.

Basically, there is no limit to the weight that humans can lift by sheer
muscle power. Nor is there a limit to the height to which this weight
can be lifted. The only advantage that fossil fuelled powered cranes
have brought us, is a higher lifting *speed*. Of course, this does not
mean that one man can lift anything to any height, or that we can lift
anything to any height if we just bring enough people together. But,
starting more than 5,000 years ago, engineers designed a collection of
machines that greatly enhanced the lifting power of an individual or a
group of people. Lifting devices were mainly used for construction
projects, but (later) also for the loading and unloading of goods, for
hoisting sails on ships, and for mining purposes. ([picture
credit](http://www.flickr.com/photos/11673607@N03/1159224447/in/photostream/)).



The advantage that fossil fuel powered cranes have brought us, is a
higher lifting speed



Initially, the lifting speed of lifting machines was extremely low,
while the amount of man power required to operate them remained very
high. Towards the end of the nineteenth century, however, just before
steam power took over, human powered lifting devices became so elaborate
that one man could lift a 15 tonne truck in no time, using only one
hand.

Mechanical advantage

Any lifting device has a certain mechanical advantage (MA), the factor
by which it multiplies the input force into an output force. A lower
input force must always be applied over a greater distance than the
greater output force travels, and the ratio of the distances is the
velocity ratio (VR). In theory, the mechanical advantage (MA) = the
velocity ratio (VR), so that in a machine with a mechanical advantage of
2 to 1, the input force is half the output force but must be exerted
over twice the distance. In practice, friction always reduces the ideal
mechanical advantage of a machine.
([source](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0199734852?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0199734852)).

Ramps & levers


some think that the Egyptians had [more sophisticated lifting
machinery](http://www.cheops-pyramide.ch/khufu-pyramid/pyramid-theories.html)
at their disposal (illustration below), most historians agree that the
Egyptians made use of only the most simple lifting devices: inclined
planes (ramps, illustrations below, on the right) and
[levers](http://www.diracdelta.co.uk/science/source/l/e/lever/source.html)
(the principle of a seesaw or teeter-totter, illustration on the right).
Ramps were (probably) also used to raise obelisks.

By moving an object up a ramp rather than completely vertical, the
amount of force required is reduced at the expense of increasing the
distance it must travel. The mechanical advantage of an inclined plane
equals the length divided by the height of the slope. The mechanical
advantage of a lever is the distance between the fulcrum and the point
where the force is applied, divided by the distance between the fulcrum
and the weight to be lifted.


the methods of the Egyptians offered a considerable mechanical advantage
over simply pulling up the load vertically by means of a rope, the
required man power remained very high: not only to tow or flip over the
stones (it must have taken around 50 men to tow a 2.5 tonne stone
block), but also to build and later remove the enormous earthen ramps.


estimate that the workforce to build a pyramid consisted of 20,000 to
50,000 men, sometimes more. While a structure like that could be built
today in a few years time with power cranes and a small workforce, most
pyramids took decades to complete.

Birth of the crane: the pulley

The first cranes appear in Greece from about the late 6th or early 5th
century BC. The Romans, more eager to build large monuments, adopted the
technology and developed it further. The earliest cranes consisted of a
rope passed over a pulley. Before it found an application in the lifting
of objects, the single pulley was used from the 8th or 9th century BC
onwards for drawing water from wells (the
[shaduf](http://www.australiancrane.com.au/crane_history1.htm)). A
single pulley offers no mechanical advantage in itself, but it changes
the direction of pull: it is easier to pull down instead of haul up.
Pushing vertically upwards with one hand generates about 150 Newton,
while pushing vertically downwards with one hand generates about 250
Newton
([source](http://www.swan.ac.uk/grst/Specific%20subjects/Mechanics/Mechanics.htm)).


the mechanical advantage of cranes was increased with additional
technology. A major improvement from the 4th century BC and still in use
today, is the compound pulley: a combination of single pulleys in a
block. The mechanical advantage equals the amount of pulleys used.

A crane with a triple pulley (a "Trispastos") has two pulleys attached
to the crane and a free pulley suspended from them. It offers a
mechanical advantage of 3 to 1. A crane with five pulleys in a similar
arrangement (dubbed a "Pentaspostos") offers a mechanical advantage of 5
to 1.

Using a compound pulley a man can lift more than he is otherwise able
to. If a single man pulling a rope can exert a force of 50 kg, he can
raise (or lower) 150 kg using a Trispastos and 250 kg using a
Pentaspostos. The same goes for the rope. A rope with a tensile strength
of 50 kilograms can be used to lift (or lower) 150 kilograms if 3
pulleys are used, and 250 kilograms if 5 pulleys are used.



A crane with five pulleys allows you to lift five times more than you
are otherwise able to - but the rope has to be pulled over five times
the distance



The downside of the compound pulley is, again, distance and thus lifting
speed. Lifting a load 3 metres using a Trispastos will require pulling
the rope for 9 metres, lifting a load 3 metres using a Pentaspastos will
require pulling the rope for 15 metres.



Images: John Spirko.

In theory, any number of pulleys can be used, but because of friction
ancient systems were limited to five pulleys. If more lifting power was
needed, rather than increasing the number of pulleys within each block,
the Romans used two or more 3- or 5- pulley sets, with different gangs
working each (a "Polyspastos"). Of course, every rope could also be
pulled by several men at once. The power loss due to friction for Roman
(and medieval) cranes is estimated to be 20 percent at most
([source](http://www.jstor.org/pss/3106635)).


Winches and capstans

Another improvement was the introduction of the windlass (or winch) and
the capstan, which both substitute for the pulling of the rope. They
were invented around the same time as the compound pulley. The only
difference between the winch and the capstan is that the former has a
horizontal axle and the latter has a vertical one.


Both use handspikes or levers inserted into slots on a drum to gain a
mechanical advantage in circular rotation, given by the radius of the
handspike to the radius of the drum or axle. The mechanical advantage of
a winch is the radius of the axle to the radius of the handspikes.
Therefore, an axle of 5 centimetres (2 inches) with handspikes 30
centimetres (1 ft) long has a mechanical advantage of 6 to 1. A man
operating the winch can thus lift 6 times more than he would when just
pulling a rope. However, to wind up 1 metre of rope the handspikes would
need to be turned 6 metres.



The treadwheel crane remained in use until the end of the 1800s




with the compound pulley, winches or capstans already offer impressive
performance. One man operating a Pentaspostos and exerting a force of 25
or 50 kilograms at the winch described above can lift a load of 750 to
1500 kilograms (25 or 50 kg x 6 x 5 = 750 or 1500 kg), while the
Egyptians needed 30 to 60 men to haul up a 1500 kilogram stone block up
a ramp.

Just like ropes, winches and capstans can be operated by multiple people
(winches by two people, capstans by many more). Capstans can also be
operated by draft animals. Four men operating a capstan with a similar
mechanical advantage as the winch described above, each exerting 25 to
50 kg of power, can lift - ignoring friction - 3 to 6 tonnes (100 or 200
kg x 6 x 5 = 3000 or 6000 kg). However, in both examples, for every
metre the load is raised, they will have to pull in 30 metres of rope.

Treadwheels

An even more powerful lifting aid than the winch or capstan was the
treadwheel. It was first mentioned in 230 BC and it remained a very
important element of cranes up until the second half of the 19th
century. Treadwheels, which usually had a diameter of 4 to 5 metres,
have a greater mechanical advantage than winches or capstans, because of
the larger radius of the wheel compared to the radius of the axle.
Moreover, the power generated by a person's arm and shoulder is replaced
by the greater power of a person walking (not running) within the wheel.
A treadwheel with a wheel radius of 7 feet (213 cm) and a drum radius of
0.5 feet (15 cm) has a mechanical advantage of 14 to one. This concerns
a treadwheel with a diameter of 456 centimetres: 2 x 213 cm radius of
the wheel + 2 x 15 cm radius of the drum (diameter = 2 x radius).
([source](http://www.jstor.org/pss/3106635)).


a mechanical advantage of 14 to one, one man in a treadwheel operating a
Pentaspastos and exerting a force of 50 kilograms could thus lift a load
of 3500 kilogram or 3.5 tonnes. That's about 70 times more than he could
lift with a simple pulley.

Some cranes (especially the harbour cranes from the middle ages and
onwards) were equipped with two treadwheels attached to the same axle,
bringing the total lifting power of a human powered crane to some 7,000
kilograms or 7 tonnes. Because many treadwheels were also wide enough
for two people walking side by side, a crane with two treadwheels could
be powered by 4 people, which brings the maximum lifting power at 14
tonnes - comparable to that of a common modern tower crane. Even taking
into account a loss of 20 percent due to friction, this is still 11.2
tonnes. ([picture
credit](http://fotoalbum.seniorennet.be/viennes/reisfotos)).



A large treadwheel gives a mechanical advantage of 14 to 1



Of course, a mechanical advantage of 14 to 1 also meant that the men had
to walk 140 metres inside the wheel to lift a load to a height of 10
metres. If they walk 5 kilometres per hour, the load would be lifted at
a speed of 0.35 km/h or almost 6 metres per minute (the velocity of the
wheel divided by the velocity of the load = radius of the wheel divided
by the radius of the drum).([source](http://www.jstor.org/pss/3106635)).


towers

While the lifting capacity of a ancient treadwheel crane is impressive,
attentive readers will have noticed that Roman buildings contained stone
blocks that were considerably heavier than that. The Romans also shipped
a few dozens of obelisks from Egypt and re-erected them in their cities
- the heaviest of these weighing more than 500 tonnes. How did they
manage this with 6 or 12 ton cranes? Basically, in the same way that we
handle very heavy loads, by combining multiple lifting devices.

One method was to build a gigantic lifting tower powered by multiple
capstans on the ground. Although the mechanical advantage of a capstan
is considerably lower than that of a treadwheel, they could be powered
by much more people and so less machines would be needed. Moreover, they
allowed for the auxiliary power of draft animals.The method of lifting
towers is briefly mentioned by some Roman authors, but detailed
information about it comes from an engineer who lived 1000 years later:
Domenic Fontana, master builder of the Vatican.


In 1586, Pope Sixtus V decided that the 344 ton obelisk at the Circus
Maximus had to move to the square in front of the newly built Saint
Peter's Basilica. A mere 256 metres further, but nevertheless the huge
stone had to be lowered, transported, and erected again.


documented the undertaking extensively in his 1589 book "The movement of
the Vatican obelisk". By then, lifting materials, devices and methods
had hardly changed since Roman times, so we can assume that the Romans
raised the same stone in a similar manner.

The job was done using a wooden construction 27.3 metres tall, ropes up
to 220 metres long, 40 capstans, 800 men and 140 horses (when lowering
the obelisk the workforce consisted of 907 men and 75 horses). While the
whole undertaking took more than a year - including the transport of the
obelisk (on rollers) and the assembly of the tower, the capstans and
other lifting machinery - the stone was erected in just 13 hours and 52
minutes. As a result of this successful operation, many more obelisks
were moved around Rome, one of these weighing 510 tonnes.



The obelisk was raised using a wooden lifting tower 27.3 metres tall,
ropes up to 220 metres long, 40 capstans, 800 men and 140 horses



The spectators watching the event were ordered not to speak or make any
noise under the penalty of death, and police were used to enforce the
orders. Silence was crucial in maintaining communication between those
monitoring the ropes and pulleys at the top of the tower and those on
the ground operating the capstans. The signal to bein turning was given
by a trumpet; the signal to stop was given by a bell.
([source](http://www.ajaonline.org/archive/103.3/lancaster_lynne.html)).


The reinvention of Cranes in the Middle AgesFollowing the decline of the
Western Roman Empire, the use of elaborate cranes in Europe largely
disappeared for more than 800 years. Cranes operated by winches are
again recorded from the late 12th century onwards, large treadwheel
cranes only reappear in the 13th (France) and 14th (England) centuries -
a bit later than [windmills and
waterwheels]({filename}/posts/history-of-industrial-windmills.md).

Compared to Roman times, very little technical information was written
down during the Middle Ages. Most of our historical knowledge comes from
paintings and from illustrations in manuscripts. Below, a fragment of
"The Tower of Babel" by Pieter Brueghel the Elder (1563).



Luckily, a few treadwheel cranes have been preserved, all of them in the
attics of churches and cathedrals. Large cranes were an absolute
necessity in the building of the gothic churches in the late Middle
Ages, buildings that were much higher than even the tallest Roman
monuments. Furthermore, the working area on these sites was rather
limited compared to Roman conditions, and both factors led to a
different use of cranes.

Gothic churches and cathedrals

Most probably, cranes were installed inside the building, initially on
the ground, and moved upwards (and also sidewards) as the construction
work proceeded, being dismantled and reassembled multiple times. When
the church was finished, some of these cranes were left above the
[vaulting]({filename}/posts/tiles-vaults.md) and
below the roof where they might come in handy for repairs. (illustration
below,
[source](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0953021912?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0953021912)).


One of these treadwheel cranes, in Britain's Canterbury Cathedral, was
used for a renovation project in the 1970s (picture on the right,
[source](http://www.jstor.org/pss/3106635)). It dates from the late 15th
century, could accommodate one to two labourers and has a diameter of
4.6 metres. Medieval illustrators sometimes depicted cranes mounted on
the outside of the walls, but this was done probably because it made
better paintings - the walls of gothic churches and cathedrals were
generally too thin to support a heavy crane and its load.


Another well described medieval lifting device is the large treadwheel
slewing crane that stood on top of the 157 metre high Cologne Cathedral
in Germany for almost 450 years (on the right,
[source](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0953021912?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0953021912)).
It was erected in 1400 and dismantled only in 1842. The crane housed two
treadwheels, was 15.7 metres high and had a 15.4 metre long jib which
could traverse the entire working area - basically functioning like a
modern tower crane.

Harbour cranes

A new development in the Middle Ages was the stationary harbour crane,
powered by treadwheels. It was not used by the Greeks or the Romans,
possibly because they had a large enough reservoir of slave labour at
their disposal. The Roman standard shipping container, the amphora, was
rather small and could easily and rapidly be loaded and unloaded using a
human conveyor belt and a ramp
([source](http://www.pubs-newcomen.com/cgi-bin/somww.cgi?search=heavy+goods+handling+prior+to+the+nineteenth+century&Submit=Submit&type=A&session=505916A)).


cranes first appeared in Flanders, Holland (illustration on the right,
[source](http://www.arneym.nl/verkeer/00000098bf0933a06/index.html)) and
Germany in the 13th century, and in England in the 14th century. They
were more powerful than cranes used in construction, and equipped with
not one but two treadwheels having a larger diameter of up to 6.5
metres.

These more potent "engines" were not so much aimed at heavier loads but
rather at higher lifting (and lowering) speeds. In loading and unloading
goods, speed was more important than in construction, where the tempo
was dictated by the slow progress of the masons and carpenters.


by millwrights

Dockside treadwheel cranes were frequently capped by a wooden roof to
protect the mechanics and the workers from the rain. These permanent
structures had much in common with windmills, and they were most
probably built by the same craftsmen.


Analogous to [post windmills and tower
windmills]({filename}/posts/history-of-industrial-windmills.md),
there were post cranes and tower cranes: the former were wooden
structures which pivoted on a central vertical axle, the latter (mostly
built in Germany) were masonry towers with only the cap and the jib arm
rotating.

Harbour cranes were not adopted in Southern Europe and their total
number in the whole of medieval Europe was rather limited compared to
the number of windmills: about one hundred large harbour cranes have
been discovered
([source](http://www.pubs-newcomen.com/cgi-bin/somww.cgi?search=heavy+goods+handling+prior+to+the+nineteenth+century&Submit=Submit&type=A&session=505916A)).
Around [a dozen of them are still
standing](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_historical_harbour_cranes).



The most powerful harbour cranes had two treadwheels, each walked by 3
to 4 men



The most powerful treadwheel harbour cranes were built in the London
docklands in the 1850s, having two treadwheels of up to 3 metres wide,
each walked by 3 to 4 men
([source](http://www.archive.org/details/londonlabourand01mayhgoog)).
These are not to be confused with the [even wider treadwheels used in
19th century
prisons](http://www.notechmagazine.com/2010/03/prison-treadwheels.html),
where the men walked on the outside of the wheel. The two images above
show medieval harbour cranes from Bruges. The crane in the large picture
is a late model, built in 1765 and demolished in 1886
([source](http://www.mechelenblogt.be/2008/09/kranig-oudje-dient-gerevalideerd)).
The small picture shows a similar crane from the 1500s
([source](http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/8/80/Pieter_Pourbus_Portret1.jpg)).

More flexible cranes

Today's cranes can turn their jib 360 degrees (slewing) and move the
load horizontally along the jib. Initially, most cranes used in medieval
construction work were only capable of a vertical lift. The load could
only be manipulated laterally by the crane master on the ground, using a
small rope attached to the load. Dockside cranes introduced the slewing
crane, of which the first evidence appears in the 14th century.


became a common feature of construction cranes in the 1600s
(illustration on the right), which shortened work cycles considerably.

The first crane that allowed a horizontal movement of the load appeared
in a 1550 book of Georgius Agricola, but a real-world version was only
launched in 1666 by Frenchman Claude Perrault. A trolley was moved along
the whole length of the jib by means of a complicated rope system in
which two ropes were wound and unwound via a spindle attached to the
trolley.
([source](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0953021912?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0953021912)).

Let's not forget that Greek and Roman cranes were capable of very
limited horizontal movement, too, by lowering or raising the masts a
bit. Moreover, the Greeks already designed a kind of slewing crane,
which was a lifting device as described earlier but resting only on one
mast, directed and kept in balance by extra men on the ground holding
ropes.

Safety mechanisms (to prevent plummeting loads and sudden reverse
rotation of the treadwheel or capstan) were introduced only in the late
eighteenth century.


Iron cranes

In the 19th century, three important innovations appeared. The first one
was the use of iron instead of wood structures and gearings, which made
cranes stronger and more efficient. The first cast iron crane was
constructed in 1834. That same year, [the wire rope was invented, a much
stronger alternative to the natural fibre rope or the metal
chain]({filename}/posts/lost-knowledge-ropes-and-knots.md).
Finally, in 1851, the third game-changing innovation appeared: the
steam-powered crane. With the arrival of steam power, any load could be
lifted at any speed, as long as the engine was powerful enough.
([source](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0953021912?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0953021912))


rope was soon in widespread use, but the other two innovations only
caught on slowly. Wood, sometimes combined with iron, continued to be
the material of choice for many cranes well into the twentieth century,
especially in regions where timber was plentiful. And while more and
more steam cranes appeared in the second half of the nineteenth century,
hand-powered cranes kept being sold and used in large amounts. A book on
crane technology, published in 1904, still devoted half of its pages to
manually operated cranes. Bicycle cranes were sold, too (picture on the
right,
[source](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0953021912?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0953021912)).

Logically, it was also this era that produced the most powerful muscle
powered cranes ever designed: those composed of iron structures and
gearworks, using wire ropes, but not yet powered by steam. One peculiar
example of this intermediate technology is shown above: a 1843 hand
driven gantry crane for transferring carriages. Equally interesting,
though made entirely of wood, are these [early 1900's treadwheel cranes
in the
Netherlands](http://www.debinnenvaart.nl/binnenvaarttaal/afbeeldingen/landzaken/overhaal.html),
used to haul up boats over land (picture below).



A book on crane technology, published in 1904, still devoted half of its
pages to manually operated cranes



The best example, however, are the dockside cranes of William Fairbairn,
patented in 1850. Fairbairn riveted together two iron plates, creating
an arch-shaped jib that was far more stable and practical than the
previous straight wooden or iron jibs. Fairbairn steam cranes became
very well known and some of them have been preserved.

Most powerful hand crane ever


less known, however, is that for a short time these powerful cranes were
sold as hand powered machines. Because Fairbairn described these cranes
in detail in the 1860 edition of his book "[Useful information for
engineers](http://www.archive.org/details/usefulinformati09fairgoog)",
we know exactly what the - impressive - mechanical advantage of their
gearings was.

The first hand-driven Fairbairn harbour cranes were intended to lift
weights of up to 12 tons to a height of 30 feet (9 metres) above the
ground, and to sweep this load round over a circle 65 feet (20 metres)
in diameter (illustration on the left).

Next, a 60 ton crane was built for the new docks at Keyham, which could
lift loads five times heavier up to heights of 60 feet (18 metres) and
over a circle 104 feet (32 metres) in diameter.

It is this "colossal crane", probably the most powerful hand driven
crane ever built, that is described in detail by Fairbairn:

"The chain passes round 4 pulleys, two moveable and two fixed, in the
end of the jib. It is then conducted down in the interior of the jib
over three rollers to the barrel, which is also in the tube near the
ground. On each side of the crane a strong cast iron frame is fixed for
receiving the axles of the spur wheels and pinions."

"Four men, each working a winch of 18 inches radius, act by two 6 inch
pinions upon a wheel 5 feet 3.75 inches diameter, this in turn moves the
spur wheel, 6 feet 8 inches diameter, by means of an 8 inch pinion, and
on the axle of the former the chain barrel, 2 feet in diameter, is
fixed."

"Hence the advantage gained by the gearing will be W/P = 18 x 63.75 x 80
/ 6 x 8 x 12 = 158 or taking the number of cogs in each wheel W/P = 18 x
95 x 100 / 12 x 9 x 10 = 158 and as this result is quadrupled by the
fixed and moveable pulleys, the power of the men applied to the handles
is multiplied 632 times by the gearing and blocks. Two men are
sufficient to move round the crane with 60 tonnes suspended from the
extreme point of the jib."

A mechanical advantage of 632 to 1 means that each of the four men had
to apply a force of only 23.7 kilograms in order to lift a weight of 60
tonnes - and this while operating a winch instead of a more efficient
treadwheel.

The [most powerful crane in the world
today](http://gcaptain.com/maritime/blog/first-lift-worlds-largest-crane-in-action/)
(since September 2009) has a lifting capacity of 20,000 tonnes. If it
would be equipped with a gear system offering the same mechanical
advantage as that of the above described Fairbairn crane, a weight of
20,000 tonnes could be lifted by 1,265 men each exerting 25 kilograms of
power. This is comparable to the workforce that was required to lift the
340 tonne obelisk in the 16th century. And of course, there is no doubt
that we could further improve upon the 19th century gearwork and make
the mechanical advantage even higher.

We could lift anything without fossil fuels. Nevertheless, apart from
their use by some hardcore ecological architects, human powered cranes
have completely disappeared, even for the lightest of loads. We prefer
lifting things with power machinery and we run (not walk) on a treadmill
in the gym to keep in shape.

© Kris De Decker (edited by Vincent Grosjean)



We prefer lifting things with power machinery and we run (not walk) on a
treadmill in the gym to keep in shape



Sources (in order of importance)



-   "[The History of Cranes (The Classic Construction
    Series)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0953021912?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0953021912)![](http://www.assoc-amazon.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=as2&o=1&a=0953021912){width="1"
    height="1"}", Oliver Bachmann (1997). This book gives a detailed
    overview of lifting devices from the earliest times to the end of
    the 20th century. It also showed me the way to many great pictures.
-   "[The Oxford Handbook of Engineering and Technology in the Classical
    World](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0199734852?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0199734852)![](http://www.assoc-amazon.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=as2&o=1&a=0199734852){width="1"
    height="1"}", John Peter Oleson (2008). Here I found most of the
    information on the mechanical advantage of lifting devices.
-   "[Medieval treadwheels: artists' views of building
    construction](http://www.jstor.org/pss/3106635)", Andrea L. Matthies
    (1992). This study gives an informed look at medieval treadwheel
    cranes, inluding how to calculate the mechanical advantage of a
    treadwheel.
-   "[Useful information for
    engineers](http://www.archive.org/details/usefulinformati09fairgoog)",
    William Fairbairn (1860, first edition - all later editions do not
    contain the chapter on hand powered cranes). This book gave proof of
    the impressive performance of late hand powered cranes.
-   "[The construction of cranes and other lifting
    machinery](http://www.archive.org/details/constructioncra00markgoog)",
    Edward Charles Robert Marks, (1904). Detailed information on late
    hand powered cranes.
-   "[Building Trajan's
    column](http://juanadolfogoldin.googlepages.com/trajano_lancaster.pdf)",
    (.pdf), American Journal of Archeology, Lynne Lancaster (1999).
    Roman lifting techniques & the use of lifting towers.
-   "[Heavy goods handling prior to the nineteenth
    century](http://www.pubs-newcomen.com/cgi-bin/somww.cgi?search=heavy+goods+handling+prior+to+the+nineteenth+century&Submit=Submit&type=A&session=505916A)",
    F.R. Forbes Taylor (1963). An overpriced research paper compared to
    that of Andrea L. Matthies, but it gives some interesting additional
    information on harbour cranes. Also names an estimation for the
    amount of medieval dockside cranes in Europe.
-   "[Crane](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Crane_%28machine%29)",
    Wikipedia. General introduction, based on two authoritative German
    books. See also: [list of harbour
    cranes](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_historical_harbour_cranes).
-   "[Claude
    Philip](http://pagesperso-orange.fr/claude.philip/documents/index.htm)",
    illustrations of ancient cranes
-   "[Theatrum instrumentorum et
    machinarum](http://www.sil.si.edu/DigitalCollections/HST/Besson/besson.htm)",
    Jacobi Bessoni (1582). Ancient and medieval crane types.
-   "[Engineering in History (Dover Books on
    Engineering)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0486264122?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0486264122)![](http://www.assoc-amazon.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=as2&o=1&a=0486264122){width="1"
    height="1"}", Richard Shelton Kirby (1990). Extra information on
    ancient Roman and Egyptian lifting devices.
-   "[Lifting in early Greek
    architecture](http://www.jstor.org/pss/630416)", The journal of
    Hellenic studies, JJ Coulton (1974).
-   "[Rudimentary treatise on the construction of cranes and
    machinery](http://www.archive.org/details/rudimentarytrea01glyngoog)",
    Joseph Glynn (1849)



[COULD WE RUN MODERN SOCIETY ON HUMAN POWER
ALONE]({filename}/posts/could-we-run-modern-society-on-human-power-alone.md)?



The [Human Power Plant](http://www.humanpowerplant.be) project
investigates the possibilities of human energy production in a modern
society. It plans to convert a 22-floor building on the campus of
Utrecht University into an entirely human powered student community.
With a combination of low-tech solutions, lifestyle changes, and some
exercise, it demonstrates that 750 students can live a fossil fuel free
life on campus.





Related articles :

-   [Hand powered drilling tools and
    machines]({filename}/posts/hand-powered-drilling-tools-and-machines.md)
-   [Pedal powered farms and
    factories]({filename}/posts/pedal-powered-farms-and-factories.md):
    the forgotten future of the stationary bicycle
-   [Wind powered
    factories]({filename}/posts/history-of-industrial-windmills.md):
    the history (and future?) of industrial windmills
-   [Boat
    mills]({filename}/posts/boat-mills-bridge-mills-and-hanging-mills.md):
    water powered, floating factories
-   [Lost knowledge: ropes and
    knots]({filename}/posts/lost-knowledge-ropes-and-knots.md)
-   [How to downsize a transport
    network]({filename}/posts/the-chinese-wheelbarrow.md):
    the Chinese wheelbarrow
-   [The mechanical transmission of
    power (1)]({filename}/posts/mechanical-transmission-of-power-stangenkunst.md):
    Stangenkunst
-   [The mechanical transmission of
    power (2)]({filename}/posts/the-mechanical-transmission-of-power-jerker-line-systems.md):
    jerker line systems
-   [The mechanical transmission of
    power (3)]({filename}/posts/the-mechanical-transmission-of-power-3-wire-ropes.md):
    endless rope drives
-   Mixed links on [Mechanics](http://www.notechmagazine.com/mechanics/)

[Main page](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/).


