Title: Burning the Bones of the Earth: Lime Kilns
Date: 2013-09-30 22:53
Author: Kris De Decker
Category: Obsolete Technology
Tags: history, lime kilns
Slug: lime-kilns
Status: published

Explore the now-ruined estates of the Irish countryside and you
occasionally find a stone cylinder, as much as several metres high and
wide, open at the top and with a small door at the base.

Some resemble the medieval fortresses that still dot the landscape here
-- but no one built fortresses so tiny, or half-buried in the side of a
hill.

In fact, they are kilns for lime burning, a now-forgotten industry that
sustained many agrarian communities before energy became cheap.

Lime kiln in Porthgain, Wales. Picture:
[Aelwyn](http://www.flickr.com/photos/kopetatxuri/6286612774/).


“Lime” here means neither the citrus fruit nor the tree, but refers to a
white  
powder derived from limestone. For at least 7,000 years humans created  
lime in kilns, as they might have hardened pottery or smelted ore, and  
used the material for dozens of purposes now largely replaced by  
fossil-fuel by-products – perhaps most commonly to create mortar for  
construction.

British and Irish farmers, though, found it most important to
neutralise  
acid soils and multiply crop production – as much as fourfold, by some  
contemporary accounts. For hundreds of years until the mid-20th  
century, lime supported a vast and vital network of village industry&mdash; 
quarries to mine the limestone, carts and barges to transport it, and  
specialists to monitor the burning. In the late 1700s, according to one  
survey, County Cork alone was said to contain an amazing 23,000 kilns,  
or one every 80 acres. (1)

Limestone is mainly coral and shells of long-extinct sea creatures,
squeezed over aeons into a solid mass of calcium carbonate, or CaCO3.
When burned at 900 degrees C or more it vents carbon dioxide (CO2),
leaving behind the volatile calcium oxide (CaO) – “quicklime,” “burnt
lime” or “unslaked lime.” Then, when combined with water – hydrated or
“slaked”&mdash;the quicklime became calcium hydroxide or Ca(OH)2, and could
be put to many uses. Confusingly, all of these have been called “lime”
at times, but in this article, we will call the original rock
“limestone,” the caustic material from the kiln “quicklime,” and the
hydrated final product “lime” for clarity.

Roman Concrete

The earliest use of lime dates to present-day Turkey between 7,000 and
14,000 years ago, and many ancient civilisations used it to create
mortar between stones. The Romans, however, took lime a step further,
mixing it with various other ingredients to create an early version of
cement. In fact, their version has proven superior to our own in some
ways. Our concrete lasts only decades – as little as a single decade in
seawater&mdash;while Romans created concrete that not only formed in
seawater, but have withstood the pounding of waves for 2,000 years.



Picture: Disused lime kiln above Murlough Bay, Ireland, by
[Minipixel](http://www.flickr.com/photos/75052163@N00/2197082381/in/photolist-4m9C3H-R13x4-9uNKAR-d6MQp1-5PZvqp-9o2vrt-d6N7BN-cKszWs-fdHLy4-d6NbN1-egcr4v-axX7kt-5hSked-5hMXC4-5hSiGJ-5hMZ1B-8LyBWM-5o8zxy-7LjYmb-7Y67n6-7Y67Wa-96RzFV-2jjJW-2jjtQ-2jjiN-2jjgN-2jjA7-2jj89-2jjxz-2jjpE-2jj2b-2jjQz-2jjed-2jjEJ-2jjN3-2jjbu-2jjmG-2jiZR-2jjr6-2jj3B-ecNvyy-4ReWHX-6MZ8xJ-8FMVx8-8FR4c1-8FMUS8-8FR6g9-8FR5zY-8FMSN2-7LjZMQ-nUsZ4).

The secret, according to two papers released in the summer of 2013,
involved mixing quicklime with [volcanic
ash](http://www.notechmagazine.com/2011/08/building-with-pumice.html)  
to form mortar. Volcanic ash was plentifully gathered from the volcano  
at Vesuvius, according to Pliny the Elder – ironically, the same
volcano  
that would later kill him. Romans then packed this mortar into wooden  
forms and lowered them into seawater, which caused the quicklime to  
react and form a lime-and-ash mix of waterproof cement.

The papers’ authors say such techniques could prove useful even today;  
not only did their concretes stand up to time and the elements better  
than ours, but such methods are “greener” – generating less carbon  
emission – than our cement manufacture. Crushing rocks into Portland  
cement powder requires enormous quantities of energy and accounts for  
seven per cent of all industrial carbon emissions on the planet. (2)
(3)  
(4) (5) (6)



Picture: One of the forty lime kilns built between Skipton and Bradford
along  
the Leeds-Liverpool Canal, Bradford's demand for lime being one of the  
key reasons the canal was built. Photo credit: [Peter
Hughes](http://www.flickr.com/photos/sgwarnog/6268774761/in/photolist-axX7kt-5hSked-5hMXC4-5hSiGJ-5hMZ1B-8LyBWM-5o8zxy-7LjYmb-7Y67n6-7Y67Wa-96RzFV-2jjJW-2jjtQ-2jjiN-2jjgN-2jjA7-2jj89-2jjxz-2jjpE-2jj2b-2jjQz-2jjed-2jjEJ-2jjN3-2jjbu-2jjmG-2jiZR-2jjr6-2jj3B-ecNvyy-4ReWHX-6MZ8xJ-8FMVx8-8FR4c1-8FMUS8-8FR6g9-8FR5zY-8FMSN2-7LjZMQ-nUsZ4-NQfau-d4QT57-7Y67vH-7Y9mXS-7Y67DD-7Y6858-8wSW2h-8QkQMK-d6MPwu-aFqwpX-6cKcxS/).

Romans brought such technologies with them as they spread across Europe,
so lime kilns appeared in Britain with their invasion and disappeared
for several hundred years after they left. In Ireland, where Romans
never set foot, Normans apparently brought the technology in the 1200s,
to build the round towers that still frequently stand today. (7)

Whitewash, Limelight and other applications

Lime also forms the basis of whitewash, used for centuries to protect
and brighten structures, fences, vehicles and even trees, without the
alarming and unpronounceable stew of toxic ingredients in many modern
paints. Whitewash is fundamentally a mix of lime and water, although it
could also contain salt, milk, linseed oil for water-proofing, or hair
or cereal husks for strength.

The dried lime was safe to handle and even for animals to lick, but
remained mildly alkaline enough to disinfect barn and dairy walls. Its
brilliant whiteness was valued in places like Britain and Ireland, where
the winters grow very dark – Irish cottages were traditionally
whitewashed in spring and again before Christmas. In sunnier climates,
however, that same colour helped keep buildings cool.



Lindisfarne had a large limeburning industry and the kilns, which were  
built in 1860, are among the most complex in Northumberland. Picture by
[Tom
Blackwell](http://www.flickr.com/photos/tjblackwell/5837142003/in/photolist-9TNSXn-5r1NwR-5r69t3-5r1P4g-5r69Db-5r1PhT-d6NwpL-MCwQ1-8N7uR2-8Naz6A-8N7v7R-8N7tEi-8N7uzn-8NayQA-96UCAf-JcErK-cGgs45-cKneXS-8414VR-4TZmsi-4TZmoa-dC43cy-s8eqa-s8eph-fRVu6m-fRV4S3-fRTCrS-8dK3Tx-6uSpuY-s8eqt-5fYzn-iDCak-52KNv8-4R5UY9-gFecK-7T1BeZ-7T4SBC-6Ui2x9-d6MQUN-6Ui2Tj-gFebM-6owFi-8fK9pL-JJDdK-JJDcc-bLjuxV-bxpNeh-bxpNn3-4Nny8H-8n3dd2-9UQguA/).

Lime had many other uses: Farmers rubbed it on their livestock’s feet as
an antiseptic, or painted it onto fruit trees to prevent fungal
diseases. Some mixed a bit of lime into well-water to disinfect it, or
to preserve eggs for months without spoiling. Tanners used it to remove
hair from hides, gardeners to repel slugs and snails, printers to bleach
paper.

Even the corrosive quicklime, the calcium oxide that came straight from
the kiln, had many uses before it was hydrated. It kept pantries and
store-rooms dry – the 1915 household manual “*The Best Way*” recommended
keeping a bowl of it to reduce humidity, as it sucked moisture from the
air. It caught fire easily – sometimes too easily – and was used to make
an early, high-intensity lamp for the stage – the original limelight.
(8)

Terrorist Weapon

It also made a rather fearsome weapon, as it could sear the skin and
blind the eyes. In David Hume’s *A History of England*, he recounts a
battle between English and French ships around 1216, in which the
English captain Phillip d’Albiney ingeniously used quicklime to turn the
tide of battle. He saw that the winds were blowing from his ships to
French fleet, and “having gained the wind of the French, he came down
upon them with violence; and throwing in their faces a great quantity of
quick lime, which he purposely carried on board, he so blinded them,
that they were disabled from defending themselves.”



Lime kiln in Prague. Picture by [Radim
Stezka](http://www.flickr.com/photos/57470317@N03/5319303355/in/photolist-973PyP-8HRNtT-8qPnxD-6mvXTW-6nMrEd-7fQt7V-7bKgqi-dTdMxH-dTjqpL-ad7ncD-cjLb8o-baoj1r-8JbAxE-6GoUun-6PzNFQ-JZsfu-JZpuC-JYbg5-JYjw4-JYc6f-JYjrr-JY9fL-JYkdz-JYmze-JYkiP-JYiPR-JYbbY-dRV3hx-8HRNG4-9t2QTX-d4gLqo-7Jzy1t-4Pc1K3-8J8uNF-8JbAAw-6aHJ6t-c8rXnm-7Jzyei-7JDubh-5GgaYs-eWp1dR-aimgxU-aEnw3Z-azMg8u-7sL6j8-aEnxoH-6Zc6yT-9rQvPM-9rTygA-9rQwSH-7sQ769).

The compound made a handy terrorist weapon as well; when Irish reformer
Charles Parnell spoke at a political rally in 1891, someone in the crowd
threw quicklime at his face, and “had not \[he\] shut his eyes in time,
he would undoubtedly have been blinded,” his wife Katherine later wrote.

Quicklime was also shovelled into graves to decompose bodies more
quickly, as Oscar Wilde saw when he was a prisoner at Reading Gaol
(Jail) in Britain:

Lime in Agriculture: Sweetening the Soil

Its use in agriculture, however, eclipsed any other use on these
islands, so valuable was its ability to turn acid bog-lands into
croplands. Some 40 per cent of the arable land in the world is too
acidic for many plants to grow – the more acidic the soil, the more
toxic aluminium plants absorb. These days, farmers often treat such
soils with crushed limestone or other energy-intensive products, and
scientists like Chris Gustafson of the University of Missouri are trying
to genetically engineer aluminium-resistant crops. In earlier eras,
however, farmers found that lime temporarily “sweetened” or neutralised
the soil. (9)

This made lime so valuable that many agrarian communities supported a
network of local industries to create it&mdash;quarries to mine the
limestone, wagons to transport the rocks by road or barges by canal, and
specialists to supervise the burning. By the mid-1600s many families in
County Cork, Ireland, for example, paid their rent by lime-burning on
the side, according to a civil survey of the time. (10)



Lime kilns on San Juan Island, USA, built by the British. Picture by
[Travis](http://www.flickr.com/photos/baggis/7768755560/).

Farmers treated the soil in quite a straightforward manner: they
shovelled quicklime straight from the kiln onto a horse-drawn cart,
drove the cart to the needed field and drove the horse back and forth
across it as though ploughing. Every several metres the farmer stopped
the cart and scooped several shovels of quicklime in “falls” on the
ground&mdash;six to eight barrels to the acre.

Spreading a highly caustic compound onto cropland might sound
inadvisable, but the next rain both hydrated it into lime and soaked it
into the ground. Transporting the quicklime, however, was dangerous
work, as it could spontaneously burst into flame and burn carts and
barns, or simply to eat through wooden containers if it wasn’t spread
quickly. (11) (12)

The process only sweetened the land for a limited amount of time,
according to contemporary reports – three years in some fields, twelve
years in others, depending on conditions. In any case liming had to be
continually re-applied or it “enriched the father but impoverished the
son,” went the saying, so the kilns were kept in steady business. (13)

Operating the Kiln

Kilns themselves needed to be carefully situated: they needed to be as
close as possible to quarries, so that hundreds of tonnes of rock could
be carried with as little effort as possible, by horse or barge. At the
same time they had to lie as close to the lime’s destination as possible
– a fortress or church being built with mortar, or fields that needed
sweetening&mdash;so that the quicklime could also be transported without
incident. Moreover, they could not be situated near populated areas or
even campsites, as the burning lime gave off noxious and potentially
lethal gases.



The canal wharf built at the base of lime kilns constructed in 1842,
Dudley, England. Picture:[Paul
Englefield](http://www.flickr.com/photos/39027808@N00/8084295615/in/photolist-djo8ra-e8Vbp-9qxTAL-aFqngc-7fQt7V-8N7yni-pFdLe-dvQy44-cnz5zW-aeKN4c-oMsSK-fcFET-dKpfWo-aeJMiD-oMt4K-aAqSvL-d6NbKw-8nQfqk-fcEwu-c7iigS-7gi2S8-Jc3i-cQuW4w-6fsKST-5FBAFB-aeJHQt-2js1cr-6mvXTW-6mvXS7-6mvXSY-ci2nJ9-8WMHPK-bXAcbS-ckKJ8s-hktHq-7BA9jW-7BA9hL-7BA9j7-5hHgwc-5hGQXt-5hMsAy-5hMgQL-8LjMhL-5hMkb5-5hMy11-5hGKQH-5B9iQr-5MFWph-9JJJXd-8gP9pa-5rU8Jv).

The brick or stone structures were often built into hillsides to  
allow people to easily transport coal and lime to the open top, or  
mouth, and were often several metres across and about as high. On the  
inside they usually tapered down so that gravity alone fed the fuel  
down, and at the narrow bottom of the cone, one wall had an arched  
opening or “eye.”

The kiln had to be filled carefully, with precisely measured  
amounts and materials – if the lime did not bake at a high enough  
temperature for long enough, the stone would not transform into  
quicklime and the work would be in vain. Lime-burners filled the bottom  
of the kiln with the driest wood possible – furze-wood was often  
mentioned – and then the men lay alternating layers of fuel and  
limestone.

Perhaps the most common fuel was “colm” – anthracite coal – although
charcoal could also be used, as well as
“[turf]({filename}/posts/peat-and-coal-fossil-fuels-in-pre-industrial-times.md)”
– dried peat from the bogs here. Whatever the fuel, it had to be in an
opaque layer, insulating the chunks of limestone from the sides of the
kiln and from each other, according to old lime-burners interviewed
decades later for Irish national radio.

Sleeping by the Kiln

Once the kiln was filled, the wood – at the bottom of the kiln, by that
little door – was set on fire, and that, in turn, lit the fuel through
the rest of the structure. Once the kiln was lit there was no going
back; the lime-burners had to maintain a watch over the kiln for the
next three or four days, sleeping nearby. Burning was often done in
winter, when there were fewer farm chores to be done, so it must have
been tempting for men sleeping out in the cold to move closer to the
warm glow of the kiln. According to lime expert Colin Richards, however,
sleeping by the kiln was extremely dangerous, between the poison gases
and the open pit. There were cases of itinerants sleeping near the mouth
for warmth, he said, rolling into it as they slept and being roasted
alive.

Lime kiln in Quijorna, Spain. Picture by [Álvaro Moreno
Gómez](http://www.flickr.com/photos/53474483@N03/8109410207/in/photolist-dmAR8n-6o5Cu4-6o5PG8-pA1ZE-eRNU9C-pA1YB-5HqBZN-7exJXT-7exJwa-7eBDeE-7exKpx-7eBCLL-7eBBYb-7exKTp-dmARze-dmAU6y-6AJWcA-6o5Cne-cH2S2J-akKWu4).



Certainly the men did exhausting work for days at a stretch, making them
“thirsty as a lime-burner” as the saying went. A single kiln could hold
a hundred tonnes of material, which had to be shovelled in by hand, yet
delicately measured and arranged inside. Of course there was less to
shovel out – the coal had burned away, and the limestone had lost some
of its mass – but that material was much more difficult to handle.

“Drawing out the lime underneath was the dirtiest part of it,” said one
anonymous lime-burner who worked in Ireland in the 1930s and 40s and was
interviewed for a radio documentary in 1981. “It was there that you got
the dust, and you got too much of it and you began bleeding from the
nostrils.”

Magic and Ritual

With their furnace-like heat, poison vapours, alchemical
transformations, hazardous products and vital importance to agrarian
survival, it was perhaps inevitable that farmers associated kilns with
all kinds of magic and ritual. According to Irish elders interviewed in
the 1930s, young people often performed Halloween rituals around
lime-kilns to find out who they would marry.

In one instance, fairies were said to have killed off a farmer’s
livestock after he inadvertently built a kiln in their way. Other
peoples were said to have summoned evil spirits there; a reverend in
Carnmoney, rumoured to have sold his soul to the Devil, was said to have
courteously invited him to a kiln so the Devil would feel at home.
(15)(16)(17) The lime burners themselves had a simpler ritual, one they
said was practiced among “all the lime burners of old.”

“You took a bottle with you that morning … of holy water,” one said, and
before the kiln was fired up “you just sprinkled it on top the stones,
and made the Sign of the Cross, for you were burning – what they used to
say was&mdash;you were burning the bones of the Earth.”

Written by [Brian Kaller](http://restoringmayberry.blogspot.com.es/)

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Notes:

\(1) Topographical Directory of County Down, by Samuel Lewis, 1837.

\(2) “Microscopy of historic mortars — a review,” by J. Elsen, Cement and
Concrete Research, July 2005

\(3) “Chemistry and Technology of Lime and Limestone,” J. Elsen, Cement
and Concrete Research, December 2005

\(4) “Material and elastic properties of Al-tobermorite in ancient Roman
seawater concrete,” by Marie D. Jackson, Juhyuk Moon, Emanuele Gotti,
Rae Taylor, Abdul-Hamid Emwas, Cagla Meral, Peter Guttmann, Pierre
Levitz, Hans-Rudolf Wenk, and Paulo J. M. Monteiro, Journal of the
American Ceramic Society.

\(5) “Unlocking the secrets of Al-tobermorite in Roman seawater
concrete,” by Marie D. Jackson, Sejung Rosie Chae, Sean R. Mulcahy,
Cagla Meral, Rae Taylor, Penghui Li, Abdul-Hamid Emwas, Juhyuk Moon,
Seyoon Yoon, Gabriele Vola, Hans-Rudolf Wenk, and Paulo J. M. Monteiro,
American Mineralogist.

\(6) “Roman Seawater Concrete Holds the Secret to Cutting Carbon
Emissions,” Berkeley,
http://newscenter.lbl.gov/news-releases/2013/06/04/roman-concrete/

\(7) “Pre-industrial Lime Kilns,” English Heritage, May 2011

\(8) The Best Way - A Book Of Household Hints & Recipes, 1915

\(9) “Famine Fighter,” Illumination magazine, Spring / Summer 2013

\(10) The Ancient and Present State of the County and City of Cork, by C.
Smith, 1815 edition.

\(11) “Burning the Bones of the Earth,” a documentary by Radio Telefis
Eireann, 1981

\(12) Edwardian Farm, BBC Television

\(13) Essay on the Use of Lime as a Manure, by M. Puvis, 1836.

\(14) “Pre-industrial Lime Kilns,” English Heritage, May 2011.

\(15) Maureen Cunney, Currower, Attymass, Ballina, County Mayo, as part
of the 1937-38 schools initiative.

\(16) Researches in the South of Ireland, by Thomas Crofton Croker, p. 82

\(17) Irish Witchcraft and Demonology, by St. John D. Seymour, \[1913\]

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Related Articles:

-   [Medieval Smokestacks: Fossil Fuels in Medieval
    Times]({filename}/posts/peat-and-coal-fossil-fuels-in-pre-industrial-times.md).
    Almost all of the leading economies in Western Europe during the
    last  
   millenium relied on a large-scale use of fossil fuels such as peat
    and  
   coal.

<!-- -->

-   [Rings of Fire: Hoffmann
    Kilns]({filename}/posts/hoffmann-kilns-brick-and-tile-production.md).
    In a Hoffmann kiln, a 19th century brick and tile production
    factory, the fire is chased around the building in a never ending
    process that is extremely energy-efficient.

<!-- -->

-   [The Bright Future of Solar Powered
    Factories]({filename}/posts/solar-powered-factories.md).
    To power industrial  
   processes like the making of chemicals, the smelting of metals or
    the  
   production of microchips, we need a renewable source of thermal
    energy.  
   Direct use of solar energy can be the solution.

<!-- -->

-   [Building with
    pumice](http://www.notechmagazine.com/2011/08/building-with-pumice.html):
    a first-ever attempt to explain and illustrate how the volcanic
    material  
   pumice can be processed using simple technologies suitable for  
   developing countries.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

About the Author:



Brian Kaller is a journalist living in rural Ireland. He blogs at  
[Restoring Mayberry](http://restoringmayberry.blogspot.com/):

"Let’s say our modern world of consumerism and mass media has not been  
entirely beneficial. Let’s say we have lost the self-reliant skills,  
classical education and common values that were once ubiquitous. Let’s  
say our consumption has grown exponentially, and our supply of fossil  
fuels or carbon sinks turns out to be finite.  
Let’s posit a long emergency ahead – not an action-movie apocalypse,
but  
a slow conversion into a more traditional world.  
And let’s say you have a daughter."

[The art of producing sustainable consumer goods:
Basketry]({filename}/posts/basketry-the-art-of-producing-sustainable-consumer-goods.md)
is an earlier guest post from Brian Kaller.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
