Title: Lost knowledge: ropes and knots
Date: 2010-06-28 20:16
Author: Kris De Decker
Category: Obsolete Technology
Slug: lost-knowledge-ropes-and-knots
Status: published



Ropes and knots are among the most ancient and useful technologies ever
developed by man, predating the wheel, the axe and probably also the use
of fire. Today, they are fast on their way to become an obsolete
technology.




earliest fossilized fragments of ropes and knots date back 15,000 to
17,000 years, which makes the direct evidence of this technology much
older than that of the axe (6000 BC) or the wheel (5000 BC). However,
based on indirect evidence (perforated objects, wear marks on artefacts,
bone needles, representations in art, etcetera), archaeologists believe
that the use of ropes and knots dates between 250,000 and 2,500,000
years old. Speculatively, this might even predate the use of fire
(400,000 BC) and coincide with the first crude stone tools. It is
interesting to note that modern apes have some very elementary skills at
knotting and ropework, which suggests that the beginning of knot tying
may well have preceded the evolution of the genus
Homo.([source](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/9810224699?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=9810224699)![](http://www.assoc-amazon.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=as2&o=1&a=9810224699){width="1"
height="1"})

Few realize the importance that knots and cords have played in human
history. It is remarkable that they are not even mentioned in otherwise
great books on the history of technology. Yet, it is hard to find any
important technology developed over the last 250,000 years that did not,
in some way, make use of ropes and knots. Starting in prehistoric times,
they were used for hunting, pulling, fastening, attaching, carrying,
lifting and climbing.



Some early examples of their applications are fishing nets, hunting
traps, tying stones to sticks to make spears and harpoons, the
construction of bows, building shelters, making baskets, fastening
clothes, tying animals (and people), harnessing horses and oxen to
chariots, and constructing rafts. Cordage of some kind, and the knots
needed to make it work, have played a crucial role in the earliest
technological development of man.

Hauling and lifting

With the rise of civilization, the ingenuity in the application of ropes
and knots was expanded, used for the [hauling of canal
boats]({filename}/posts/trolley-canal-boats.md),
the dragging of heavy stones along ramps, and the erection of large
obelisks (first done by the ancient Egyptians), the development of
[cranes, lifting devices and
catapults]({filename}/posts/history-of-human-powered-cranes.md)
(kicked off by the Greeks and the Romans), the construction of enormous
rope bridges and rope suspension bridges (which originated in China),
the appearance of [sailing
vessels](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/sailing-ships/), and more.


construction of the noose to hang people was another application of
ropes that was invented by "civilized" people, as well as the ringing of
church and monastery bells. Although other materials were involved,
notably stone and wood, none of these technologies could have worked
without ropes and knots. Apart from all these practical uses, ropes and
knots also became an important decorative element, especially but not
limited to Chinese and Celtic cultures.

Talking knots

Ropes and knots were also used as record keeping devices, best known in
the form of the Peruvian "khipu" or "quipu". The Inca civilization (1400
- 1530) made extensive use of them for accounting and census purposes -
recording the contents of storehouses, the number of inhabitants,
etcetera ([picture credit and more
info](http://khipukamayuq.fas.harvard.edu/)).

A khipu consists of a long cord from which hang thinner ropes, sometimes
just a couple, sometimes many hundred. These pendant cords are tied in a
series of small knots. Originally, they were dyed in rich colors.
Because the Inca's, unlike other civilizations, appear to have lacked a
written language, one hypothesis is that these bundles of knotted
strings also contain narrative information and can thus be regarded as a
form of writing
([1](http://www.ee.ryerson.ca/%7Eelf/abacus/inca-khipu.html) /
[2](http://www.wired.com/wired/archive/15.01/khipu.html) /
[3](http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/full/310/5756/1903d)). The
khipu was probably developed in pre-Inca times, because less elaborate
knotting recording devices already appeared in primitive societies in
China and elsewhere
([1](http://books.google.com/books?id=jfQ9E0u4pLAC&pg=PA69&lpg=PA69&dq=knotted+strings+china+needham&source=bl&ots=7owP09CFJh&sig=XNIxG_daCzrVv8YeiY4P2uKGRXM&hl=nl&ei=0NwnTPPrFpG7jAffvayGAQ&sa=X&oi=book_result&ct=result&resnum=1&ved=0CBkQ6AEwAA#v=onepage&q&f=false)
/
[2](http://www.archive.org/stream/originsinventio00masogoog#page/n75/mode/1up)
/
[3](http://books.google.es/books?id=srV5swnM-ZgC&pg=PA91&lpg=PA91&dq=knotted+strings+china+needham&source=bl&ots=lS2MvLLaGv&sig=RCdvUWFAywp48rum-qjCK3IviNU&hl=en&ei=adInTOXFBMeQjAf1t8h0&sa=X&oi=book_result&ct=result&resnum=2&ved=0CBYQ6AEwAQ#v=onepage&q&f=false)
/
[4](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/9810224699?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=9810224699)![](http://www.assoc-amazon.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=as2&o=1&a=9810224699){width="1"
height="1"}).

![](http://www.typepad.com/site/blogs/6a00e0099229e8883300e39820a7518833/page/6a00e0099229e8883301310f445e85970c/none)
The hardware: ropes



In rope making, four basic steps are identified: preparing the fibre,
spinning the fibres together to form yarns, twisting the yarns in
bunches to form strands, and winding the strands in rope (see the
illustration on the right).

At each stage the twisting is performed in the opposite direction from
the previous stage, in order to overcome the natural tendency for each
yarn, strand or rope to unravel. Most ropes consist of three twisted
strands (called a Hawser laid rope).


is likely that the earliest "ropes" in prehistoric times were naturally
occuring lengths of plant fiber, such as vines, followed by the first
attempts at twisting and braiding these strands together to form the
first proper rope in the modern sense of the word. This must have been a
time-consuming process, more related to weaving plant fibers into mats
and baskets than to later ropemaking methods (more info:
[1](http://books.google.com/books?id=HlwUo0IccoMC&printsec=frontcover&dq=Primitive+Technology:+A+Book+of+Earth+Skills&source=bl&ots=tOeoft9DGs&sig=4rQYXkvOulagCeWYgOE5YGSwgHc&hl=nl&ei=Ky9_S8TqMpP20gSH_bCRDw&sa=X&oi=book_result&ct=result&resnum=4&ved=0CBgQ6AEwAw#v=onepage&q&f=false),
[2](http://www.primitiveways.com/cordage.html),
[3](http://www.primitiveways.com/hemp_dogbane.html) and
[4](http://www.primitiveways.com/cordage_video.html)).


For centuries afterwards, ropemaking remained a manual process, without
the use of tools. It could be done alone, or by two people working
together. In the latter case, one person held the two strands, one of
them in his hand and the other tied to his big toe, while his companion
standing some distance away twisted them together
([source](http://books.google.com/books?id=X7X4A5efIooC&pg=PA237&lpg=PA237&dq=rope+chinese+bamboo+needham&source=bl&ots=14w7pk_7VR&sig=FVIblhe1KlvVXDDDue2Ithhsn4Y&hl=nl&ei=EvcnTK-7K4vy0gTO0NTFBA&sa=X&oi=book_result&ct=result&resnum=1&ved=0CBQQ6AEwAA#v=onepage&q&f=false)).

Another simple method was used in China when making bamboo ropes. Two
workers on a high wooden tower corded bamboo strips which had been cut
several metres long and hung down from the working platform so as not to
become entangled, see the picture above left
([source](http://books.google.com/books?id=X7X4A5efIooC&pg=PA237&lpg=PA237&dq=rope+chinese+bamboo+needham&source=bl&ots=14w7pk_7VR&sig=FVIblhe1KlvVXDDDue2Ithhsn4Y&hl=nl&ei=EvcnTK-7K4vy0gTO0NTFBA&sa=X&oi=book_result&ct=result&resnum=1&ved=0CBQQ6AEwAA#v=onepage&q&f=false)).
The ancient Egyptians (from 4000 BC on) were the first to develop a
special tool to assist the making of rope, using a hand held spindle
([source](http://www.nefertiti.iwebland.com/trades/rope.htm)). Much
later, similar devices appeared in Europe and China (illustration above,
right).

Ropewalks

International trade by sailing vessels skyrocketed in late medieval
Europe and naturally, so did the demand for ropes. Sailing ships
required rope for anchors and rigging (supporting the masts and managing
the sails), and could easily carry with them 35 kilometres (around 20
miles) of rope. The arrival of larger sailing vessels (and the growing
importance of the mining industry) meant there appeared a need for much
longer, stronger and thicker ropes.



This led to the construction of some of the most remarkable industrial
workshops and buildings in history: ropewalk factories. Because the
spinning of the fibres (illustration above, England, 1770) and the
twisting of the yarns and strands (illustrations below) had to be done
in a straight line, the length of the rope was set by the length of the
workshop. This resulted in strange looking narrow buildings which were
typically 350 to 450 metres (1150 to 1475 feet) long by the 18th and
19th centuries, a time when navigation and mining kept pushing the
demand for ever longer ropes. One ropewalk factory in Australia at the
end of the 19th century was 760 metres long (2500 feet,
[source](http://members.ozemail.com.au/%7Egaryhelen/ropemaking.htm)).

Several (human-powered) machines were added to make the process more
efficient (illustration below - note that the illustrator made the
ropewalk look much shorter than it was). At the beginning of the
Industrial Revolution, these were scaled up and converted to steam
power. In Europe, the US and Australia, some ropewalks remained in
operation until the middle of the 20th century, after being converted to
be powered by electricity. In some "lesser developed" countries they are
still being used.



The ropewalk method - which was also in use in China - is very simple.
Describing it is a little more difficult. I came across many lengthy and
sometimes puzzling explanations, but the one I found in the book
"[Handbook of Fibre Rope
Technology](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0849325889?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0849325889)![](http://www.assoc-amazon.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=as2&o=1&a=0849325889){width="1"
height="1"}" makes it quite clear (the accompanying illustration comes
from the same source):

<div>


"At one end, there is the jack, which has three hooks that can be
rotated. At the other end, there is a carriage with a single, rotatable
hook. In stage one, three sets of yarns are pulled off bobbins and are
held along the length of the ropewalk." "In stage 2, an assistant turns
the crank handle of the jack so that the yarns are twisted into strands
by the rotation of the three hooks on the jack. Twist causes the lengths
to contract, so that the carriage has to move along the ropewalk, under
the control of the ropemaker." "In stage 3, the hook on the carriage
rotates in order to twist the strands into the rope. In the usual mode
of operation, the initial strand twist is made as high as possible
without kinking. When the single hook on the carriage is released, the
high torque in the strands causes the hook to rotate, and this, in turn,
cause the three strands to twist together and form the rope. The
ropemaker controls the production of the rope by continually pushing
back its form of formation to give a tight structure. Meanwhile, the
assistant continues to rotate the crank to make up for the loss of twist
in the strands."

</div>

Remaining Ropewalks

Most ropewalks were set up outdoors, sometimes underneath a wooden
shelter. Some were housed in a brick or wooden building, which dates
back to the beginnings of the 19th century.


The majority of earlier communities, irrespective of their size, had
their modest ropewalk. Coastal towns, due to necessity, had several of
them. For example: Boston (US) had 14 ropewalks in 1794, Plymouth (UK)
had 14 of them in 1816
([source](http://www.swmaritime.org.uk/article.php?articleid=275&atype=m)).

Ropewalks were mostly located outside the city or town, because of the
fire risk they posed. In wooden structures especially, the combination
of dried hemp and the open flames of the tarring vats was very risky
(tar, made from pine trees, was used to make hemp cords more
water-resistant).

Nothing remains of the smaller medieval ropewalks, nor of many later
ropewalks in open air or in wooden buildings. However, some ropewalks
housed in brick buildings are still intact. The [ropewalk at Chatham
Dockyard](http://www.chdt.org.uk/Ropery/About_the_Ropery/explore_ropery.html),
UK, constructed in 1790 and the only one which is still producing rope
commercially today (see these
[images](http://www.flickr.com/photos/peejaybee1/sets/72157612124015576/))
has an internal length of 346 metres (1,135 ft.). In the US, a 250 foot
section of an early 19th century rope walk (the [Plymouth Cordage
Company
Ropewalk](http://www.mysticseaport.org/index.cfm?fuseaction=home.viewpage&page_id=B94B460D-E0F9-6340-E44E4A267DD98CF1))
is preserved at the Mystic Seaport Museum in Connecticut.



The largest rope walk still standing dates from 1666 and was in
operation until 1867: "[La Corderie
Royale](http://www.corderie-royale.com/fr/visitez/la-corderie-royale.html)"
in Rochefort, France. With an internal length of 374 metres (390 metres
external length), it was the longest brick building of the 17th century
(aerial view of it above,
[source](http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Corderie_royale.png))
and could produce ropes with a length of up to 246 metres. (Twisting the
strands into rope shortened the length of it, naturally. The final rope
was about two thirds of the length of the yarns used.)


The software: knots


By themselves, ropes are essentially useless. They have to be tied to
something (be it an object, another rope or to themselves) and therefore
they need *knots* to function. A simple comparison would be that if
ropes are considered the hardware, knots would be the software. While
knotting technology must have been very simple in prehistoric times, it
became a highly specialized art over time.

The sheer number and diversity of knots that was once in use would be
bewildering to the modern city-dweller. [About 4,000 different knots
exist, ranging from the very simple to the extremely
complex]({filename}/posts/how-to-tie-the-world-together-online-knotting-reference-books.md).
Not so long ago, each profession or trade had adopted the knots best
suited to its requirements, and knotting was part of their daily lives.
Today, only campers, boy-scouts, climbers and sailors acquire some
knowledge of this once imperative technology.


are two reasons for the demise of knotting. Firstly, many technologies
that were once dependent on ropes and knots have disappeared. These are
most notably sailing ships, but we have also stopped hauling canal boats
and using pack trains or catapults (we have bombers and diesel engines
now), as well as hundreds of more mundane tools and devices that once
made use of ropes.


The demise of natural fibres

Secondly, the hardware has changed. From prehistoric times to midway the
20th century, ropes were made from vegetable fibres (and to a much
lesser extent from animal fibres such as sinews and hairs). Egyptian
rope was generally made of papyrus plants or date palm fibre. In Eastern
Asia, bamboo, grasses, and coconuts were used.

Hemp, which use originated in China in the third millennium BC, became
for many centuries the material of choice for rope manufacturing in
Europe and, from the 17th century onwards, North America.

In 19th century Europe and North-America, hemp (and flax) were largely
superseded by [imported tropical
fibres](http://www.archive.org/details/industrialfiberp00mull): mainly
manila (made from the leaves of the abaca plant), but also coir (made
from the shell of coconuts), sisal and henequen. Cotton and jute were
also used to make (weaker and less durable) ropes.

Beginning in the second half of the nineteenthy century, many ropes made
of natural fibres were superseded by "ropes" made of steel. Elevators,
cranes and suspension bridges, for instance, are now fully dependent on
steel "[wire
ropes](http://www.archive.org/details/americanwirerope00amerrich)",
while modern sailing yachts make use of steel wires. Gradually, wire
ropes also supplanted natural fibre ropes for mining and mooring
purposes.



Where "real" ropes are still used, for example in the fishing industry,
for water sports equipment, parachutes, hot air balloons (illustration
below) or for mountaineering (including [industrial rope
access](http://www.irata.org/)), they are now almost always made out of
synthetic materials, based on refined oil - a trend that kicked off in
the 1950s. Today, the market for natural fibre rope has all but
disappeared.



Polymer-based ropes are stronger and lighter than ropes made from
natural fibres, naturally replacing them in no time.
[Nylon](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nylon) came out of the laboratory
at the end of the 1930s, and today it is the most frequently utilized
material for the production of ropes.
[Polyester](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Polyester) and
[Polypropylene](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Polypropylene) arrived on
the market in the 1940s and the 1950s respectively - these materials are
not as strong as nylon but much cheaper than natural fibre ropes.

Today we have - [among many
others](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Synthetic_fibers) -
[Kevlar](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kevlar),
[Technora](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Technora),
[Twaron](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Twaron),
[Vectran](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vectran),
[Zylon](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zylon) and [Ultra High Molecular
Weight
Polyethylene](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ultra_high_molecular_weight_polyethylene)
ropes (the latter are 10 to 100 times stronger than steel). Amazon books
arrive in boxes tied together with adhesive tape, gadgets come in boxes
held together by plastic strapping. The only natural fibre rope that I
could find in my apartment was the cat-scratching post.

Of course, contrary to natural fibre ropes, the manufacturing of
synthetic cordage requires expensive, high-tech (and at present
digitalized) machinery.

Knot-holding ability

None of these new materials is compatible with knots. This speaks for
itself in the case of steel wires, adhesive tape and plastic strappings,
but the same goes for synthetic ropes: most have very poor "knot-holding
ability" - this is why shoelaces are mostly still made of natural
fibres. Knots have thus been replaced by an array of other fastening
technologies, made out of plastic, steel or aluminium (illustration
below).

Moreover, most natural fibre ropes sold today when compared to those
sold one hundred years ago are of inferior quality, and are more likely
to be made water-resistant by the use of biocides and chemical
preservatives instead of using tar
([source](http://www.neropes.com/Resources/history_of_rope.pdf), pdf).



Interestingly, natural fibres keep losing terrain to their synthetic
alternatives. Manufacturing a wire rope is somewhat similar to making
one from natural fibre: the individual steel wires are twisted into a
strand, and these strands are again twisted around a core. Until
recently, this core was made out of hemp, or another natural fibre, but
these days this is becoming increasingly rare. Instead, steel or plastic
(Polypropylene or PVC) cores are now commonly used. And if a hemp rope
is still used as the core of a wire rope, it is impregnated with PVC
([source](http://www.inventionfactory.com/history/RHAwire/introwr/introwre.html)).


Roped, wired, wireless

Synthetic fibres and steel might be stronger than hemp rope, but this
progress comes with a price. Synthetic ropes release toxic fumes when
they alight, they are not bio-degradable (which is why they don't rot)
and they cannot be recycled (some of them can in theory, but not nylon,
which is the most used).

Natural fibre ropes, on the other hand, were extensively recycled
throughout history, either for making new (lesser quality) ropes or to
produce "oakum", which was driven into the seams of wooden ships to
render them water-tight.

Both steel and plastic ropes and wires are much more energy-intensive to
produce than natural fibre ropes, and they are fully dependent on fossil
fuels for their existence (steel could be produced by renewable
energies, but in reality this does not happen). It also means that their
cost is dependent on the price of oil, which is not the case for locally
grown natural fibres. In short, fastening technologies are now dependent
on non-renewable sources, while natural fibre ropes and knots are not.
This sounds familiar, because it is true for most of our modern
technologies. Of course, because all our machines are adapted to
stronger steel and plastic ropes we can't go back to natural fibre ropes
unless we adapt the machinery itself.



While ropes have disappeared, our society has become ever more "wired" -
the arrival of electricity and modern communications technologies around
the turn of the twentieth century have brought with them an explosion of
wires or, more correctly termed, cables (because they always consist of
bundles of wires).

While I was wandering around my apartment in search of ropes, I had no
trouble finding cables. In just one hundred years, we evolved from a
"roped" society to a "wired" society. And more recently we seem to have
entered the "wireless" age, with mobile phones, internet over the
airwaves and - if we let the engineers have their way - wireless
electricity. Since all these new applications keep pushing fossil fuel
consumption up, it is a safe bet that before the 21st century is over,
society will return to ropes, ropewalks and knots.

© Kris De Decker (edited by Shameez Joubert)



  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
   
   
   
   
 ------------------------------------------------------------------------





Additional sources :

-   [How to tie the world together: Online knotting reference
    books]({filename}/posts/how-to-tie-the-world-together-online-knotting-reference-books.md)
-   [History and Science of
    Knots](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/9810224699?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=9810224699)![](http://www.assoc-amazon.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=as2&o=1&a=9810224699){width="1"
    height="1"}, JC Turner & P van de Griend (1996), [free access in
    some
    libraries](http://ebooks.worldscinet.com/ISBN/9789812796134/toc.shtml)
-   [Rope](http://www.americanheritage.com/articles/magazine/it/1991/2/1991_2_38.shtml),
    Invention & Technology Magazine (1991)
-   [Cordage and cordage hemp and
    fibres](http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924003611542), Thomas
    Woodhouse (1919)
-   [Handbook of Fibre Rope
    Technology](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0849325889?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0849325889)![](http://www.assoc-amazon.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=as2&o=1&a=0849325889){width="1"
    height="1"}, H.A. McKenna (2004)
-   [The history of
    rope](http://www.neropes.com/Resources/history_of_rope.pdf), Bill
    Fronzaglia (pdf)
-   [Ropes and
    cordages](http://charles.hamel.free.fr/knots-and-cordages/ropes_cordages.html)
    (website)
-   [Noeuds et
    brêlages](http://cnum.cnam.fr/CGI/fpage.cgi?4KY28.32/64/100/432/0/0)
    (La Nature, 1889)
-   [Corderie](http://portail.atilf.fr/cgi-bin/getobject_?a.25:211./var/artfla/encyclopedie/textdata/IMAGE/),
    Encyclopédie Diderot (1751-1772)
-   [Corderie
    (Planches)](http://portail.atilf.fr/cgi-bin/search2e?SYSTEM_DIR=/var/artfla/encyclopedie/textdata/IMAGE/&title=CORDERIE),
    Encyclopedie Diderot (1751-1772), better quality scans
    [here](http://charles.hamel.free.fr/knots-and-cordages/PICASA_Slideshow/DDM-Art-Corderie-Orig/index.html).
-   [How to build a ropewalk for ship
    models](http://www.densmodelships.com/2.html) (diy)
-   More [primitive
    technology](http://www.notechmagazine.com/primitive-technology/)
-   More articles on [obsolete
    technologies](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/obsolete-technology.html).



Related articles:



-   [Aerial
    ropeways]({filename}/posts/aerial-ropeways-automatic-cargo-transport.md):
    automatic cargo transport for a bargain
-   [The art of producing sustainable consumer
    goods]({filename}/posts/basketry-the-art-of-producing-sustainable-consumer-goods.md):
    basketry
-   [Get wired: trolleybuses and
    trolleytrucks]({filename}/posts/trolleytrucks-trolleybuses-cargotrams.md)
-   [Trolley canal
    boats]({filename}/posts/trolley-canal-boats.md)
-   [Water powered cable
    trains]({filename}/posts/water-powered-cable-trains.md)
-   [Human powered cranes and lifting
    devices]({filename}/posts/history-of-human-powered-cranes.md)
-   [Hand powered drilling tools and
    machines]({filename}/posts/hand-powered-drilling-tools-and-machines.md)
-   [How to tie the world together: Online knotting reference
    books]({filename}/posts/how-to-tie-the-world-together-online-knotting-reference-books.md)
-   [The mechanical transmission of power: endless rope
    drives]({filename}/posts/the-mechanical-transmission-of-power-3-wire-ropes.md)

[Main page](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/).



----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
