Title: Power Water Networks in Switzerland
Date: 2016-03-29 18:34
Author: Kris De Decker
Category: Obsolete Technology
Slug: medium-pressure-power-water-networks-in-switzerland
Status: published

This pages contains supplementary information to the article "[Power
Water
Networks]({filename}/posts/hydraulic-accumulator-power-water-networks.md)".

While hydraulic transmission is most suited to operate powerful but
infrequently used machinery, this does not mean that it is totally
unsuited for running a network of continuously operating machines. It
all depends on how powerful the machines are.

Even the smallest 1.25 cm diameter pipe still gives a maximum power
output of 3.26 hp (2.4 kW) at a pressure of 700 psi. Even if we
substract 0.4 kW for the losses in distribution and in the motor, this
still leaves more than enough power for operating many workshop tools.
In *On the Development and Transmission of Power from Central Stations*
(1894), W.C. Unwin notes:

"In neither the high pressure nor the low pressure network is the amount
which can be transmitted by a single main very great. They are best
adapted for machines working only a fraction of the 24 hours, *or motors
for small industries not requiring a great amount of power*".

Medium Pressure Power Water Networks

A great example of the second application were the power water networks
built in Switzerland, the only country that established *medium*
pressure public water schemes for power purposes. Between 1866 and 1895,
hydraulic transmission systems aimed partly or exclusively at the
distribution of power water were set up in several Swiss cities: Zürich,
Geneva, Bâle, Neuchâtel, Lausanne, Bern, Vevey, Montreux, Lucerne and
Lugano.


a small double-acting water engine that was used to drive sewing
machines in Austria - a neighbouring country of Switzerland - around
1900. Water enters through the pipe at right and leaves through the pipe
at bottom centre. The overall height is about 8 inches (20 cm). Note the
drip tray around the bottom of the engine. This example is in the Vienna
Technology Museum. Picture by [The Museum of
Retrotechnology](http://www.aqpl43.dsl.pipex.com/MUSEUM/POWER/waterengine/waterengine4.htm).

While the services were partly inspired by those designed by Armstrong,
the workings and applications were quite different. The Swiss power
water networks were designed to run continuously operating machines,
many of them requiring circular motion. (The power was supplied by
Pelton turbines and Schmidt motors, the latter being piston type
engines).

Geneva Power Network

The most extensive Swiss system was built in Geneva. In 1872, the
previously existing system of mains used to operate the city's fountains
was equipped with water pressure engines and extended. This became known
as the low pressure network, which initially served to supply both
potable water and power water through the same mains under a pressure of
70 to 85 psi. By 1885, it was operating 141 water motors.

A second network of mains&mdash;the medium pressure system&mdash;was
inaugurated in 1886. Although it supplied potable water to some
districts not reached by the low pressure system, it was especially
intended to supply motive power to the artisans in the entire area of
town. The low pressure system was now exclusively used for supplying
potable water.



The medium pressure power water network operated at a pressure of 200
psi&mdash;three to five times the pressure of the normal town mains, but
less than one-third the pressure of the Armstrong systems. The water
motors connected to this network could each generated up to 4 hp using
3.5 cm diameter pipelines, and up to 50 hp with 10 cm diameter
pipelines. In 1895, the medium pressure network supplied 55 different
industries and a total of 195 water motors with an average output of 17
hp each. It was later extended to the suburbs and the villages in the
surrounding countryside.

Five water turbines, each working two pumps, were installed with the
inauguration of the new power station in 1886, then one or two were
added each year until 1896, when the station had 18 turbines and a power
capacity of 6,ooo hp. The "Usine de la Coulouvrenière" was at that time
the largest power plant in Europe.

Direct Hydro Pumped Storage Plant

Another important difference between the Swiss systems and the other
European and Australian networks, was topography. The power networks
built by or inspired by Armstrong were all built on flat land, while the
Swiss systems were built in the mountains. The Swiss could make use of
natural water reservoirs at great heights, which allowed them to obtain
a water pressure higher than that of a water tower without the use of
hydraulic accumulators.

The mountains also provided them with the opportunity to use water
turbines instead of steam engines for pumping water, thus producing 100%
renewable energy&mdash;at the time, the Swiss had no access to coal. Last
but not least, the water reservoirs offered a much higher power storage
capacity than the hydraulic accumulators of the Armstrong systems.

In the nineteenth-century high pressure systems, hydraulic accumulators
mainly acted as regulators of pressure and water flow, their storage
power capacity being much smaller than that of a water tower. In Geneva,
the water was pumped from the lake alongside the town into a large
storage reservoir 119 m higher, at a distance of about 4 km from the
town.


motor used running on the low pressure water network, Switzerland,
around 1880. Source: [République et Canton de
Genève](http://www.ge.ch/patrimoine/sms/docs/pub/expo98/EXPO_machine02.pdf)
(PDF).

Three of the water turbines pumped up water to this reservoir at night,
when demand for power was too low to keep them fully employed. This
increased the power capacity during the day, when the demand for power
water was largest&mdash;the reservoir could furnish about 800 hp for 5
hours. It would have taken almost 2,000 hydraulic accumulators to match
the storage capacity of the Geneva reservoir.

The Geneva system initially worked without storage: water was pumped
straight from the lake into the mains, using energy form a central
hydraulic power station that was built together with the medium pressure
network. However, the demand for power water was variable, large during
the day and very small during the night.

When the city's craftsmen closed their valves in their workshops and
went home, the turbines in the central station built up excessive water
pressure and had to be shut down as fast as possible. A first solution
was found in a safety valve (the "jet d'eau") right next to the power
plant, which could spurt a 30 m high fountain in the air, releasing the
pressure if demand suddenly fell.

Direct Hydro Pumped Storage Plant

In a sense, the Swiss power water networks worked in a similar fashion
as the modern South-American [direct hydro
installations]({filename}/posts/direct-hydropower.md)
we described in a previous article, although the Swiss examples were
more sophisticated. The water was distributed to many machines, and the
system also included large-scale energy storage.

In fact, the network in Geneva could be described as a direct hydro
pumped storage plant. The intricate distribution network must have
introduced quite some friction loss, but then again the Swiss had enough
water available, and they did not need to use coal to produce water
under pressure.


of the 17 Jonval turbines producing water under pressure in Geneva,
Switzerland. The turbine on the picture was built in 1885 and was in
operation for more than 1o0 years. Source: [Wikipedia
Commons](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Schiffbau_jonval2.jpg)

Starting in 1888, part of the water from the reservoir was used to
produce electricity, not replacing the hydraulic network but
complementing it, which led to an electrified network of tramways in
1894. The electricity was produced by "branched" dynamos on the high
pressure network, similar to the system in Antwerp.

In 1892, a second power plant was constructed, exclusively for
electricity production, after which the first one again focused
exclusively on the production of water under pressure. In Zürich, where
a similar but smaller system was built a bit earlier, the power complex
supplied a third energy source&mdash;direct mechanical power, transferred
by wire rope.

Kris De Decker

Read more:

-   [Power Water
    Networks]({filename}/posts/hydraulic-accumulator-power-water-networks.md)
-   [Power from the tap: water
    motors](Power%20from%20the%20Tap:%20Water%20Motors%20Back%20to%20Basics:%20Direct%20Hydropower)
-   [Back to Basics: Direct
    Hydropower]({filename}/posts/direct-hydropower.md)

