Title: Moonlight towers: light pollution in the 1800s
Date: 2009-01-19 00:12
Author: Kris De Decker
Category: Obsolete Technology
Tags: arc lighting, history, light pollution, lighting, low-tech, moonlight towers, technology
Slug: moonlight-towers-light-pollution-in-the-1800s
Status: published


the end of the 19th century, many towns and cities were lit up by
powerful electrical lamps placed on towers up to 300 feet (90 metres)
high.

The arc lamp - the first electric light and the predecessor of Edison’s
incandescent light bulb - was extremely bright and much more energy
efficient than other lighting technologies from those times.

The lamps were too strong for indoor use, but they were regarded as the
future of municipal lighting. Especially in the United States, many
cities and towns were illuminated as if they were immense sports
stadiums.

  
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

src="http://pagead2.googlesyndication.com/pagead/show\_ads.js"&gt;  

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The arc light (or “electric candle”) was invented and demonstrated by
Sir Humphry Davy at the very beginning of the 19th century in England.
Davy, who can be considered the true founder of electric lighting,
discovered that a blinding white light was produced by hooking up two
charcoal rods to a battery, and bringing them very close together.



In an incandescent light bulb (which was developed only 70 years later)
an electric current is transferred over a filament, but in the case of
an arc lamp this happens through the air instead. If two electrified
carbon rods touch each other, some of the carbon vaporizes. By further
moving the rods just a little bit apart, the current flows through the
vaporizing carbon and spans the air gap with an “arc” of intense light.



An electric candle typically produced a light of 1,500 to 6,000
candlepower, which corresponds to the output of 11 to 43 modern 100-watt
incandescent light bulbs. The temperature in the arc could rise to 4,000
degrees Celsius (more than 7,000 degrees Fahrenheit), the highest
temperature that man achieved until the arrival of the atomic bomb.

Candles, oil and gas lamps

The discovery of the arc light was a spectacular feat, because the light
it produced was incomparably stronger than anything else available at
that time: candles, oil lamps and – appearing around the same time –
open flame gas lights, which produced only 10 to 20 candlepower.

It was obvious that the powerful light of an arc lamp was absolutely
unsuitable for use in a room. As a way of lighting up streets and large
interior spaces, however, the technology sounded very promising.

Large buildings, like theatres, were sometimes lit by hundreds or even
thousands of candles. It took an awful lot of work to install, to light
and to replace all those candles (see below), not to mention the toxic
smoke, the smell, the heat, the built-up of soot and the risk of fire
resulting from this.



Oil lamps had similar drawbacks, and the recent open flame gas lamps
were only a modest improvement - the only advantages being that they
were a little bit stronger and cleaner and only had to be ignited once.
Streets were lit by oil or open flame gas lamps (or not at all). Every
street lamp had to be lit individually every night, and extinguished
every morning.


Lamps, but no electricity

In spite of the poor alternatives, it took more than 70 years before the
arc lamp resulted in practical lighting devices on a large scale. The
problem was not so much the lamp itself, but the power source.


only sources of electricity during the first half of the 19th century
were inefficient batteries, which made the use of arc lamps very
impractical and excessively expensive.

In the 1840s and 1850s, there were some public demonstrations with arc
lights and a few early limited applications (notably in lighthouses,
theatres and on large construction sites), but it was only with the
arrival of useful [electric generators
(dynamos)](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/dynamos-electric.html) at the
end of the 1870s, that the arc lamp took off.

Around that time, the most important disadvantage of the arc lamp was
also solved. The carbon rods were consumed while the lamp was burning,
which meant that the lamp had to be regulated by hand almost
continuously to keep the distance between the rods constant.

This was more or less resolved in the 1840s by self-regulating
mechanisms (illustration at right), but it was the invention of the
Yablochkov arc lamp in 1876 that resolved the issue completely. The rods
were placed parallel to each other, which eliminated the need for
complex mechanisms. That made the arc lamp much more reliable.

20 times more energy efficient

At the end of the 1870s, gas light had conquered the streets of many
cities, to a lesser degree still supported by earlier oil lamps. But arc
lamps were brighter, cheaper and safer. Around the same period the first
practical incandescent light bulbs appeared, but they were not much
competition either.

Early incandescents only produced around 12 candlepower and were 20
times less energy efficient than arc lamps (it is interesting to note
that 19th century arc lamps are still more energy efficient than todays
incandescents, and that early 20th century arc lamps can even compete
with today's compact fluorescents – but this is comparing apples with
oranges since arc lights were not suited for use indoors).

What followed was a true boom of arc lighting. Hundreds of thousands of
arc lights were installed, mainly on streets and squares but also on
markets, in harbours, railway stations, public buildings, department
stores, exhibition halls, hotels, theatres, office buildings, castles,
monuments, museums and libraries.

Paris set the ball running in 1877, with 54 street lights on the Avenue
de l’Opéra and 80 lamps in the Grand Magasins du Louvre. London and
other European cities followed in 1878, and in 1879 the first arc lights
were installed in the United States.



The US quickly became the leader of electric arc lighting. In 1884 there
were already more than 90,000 arc lamps lighting the night sky in the
US, and that number rose to 235,000 in 1890, when virtually every US
city was using arc lighting, more than 400,000 in 1902 and almost
700,000 in 1907. But it was not just in numbers that the US outstripped
Europe and Great Britain.

Moonlight towers

While European cities placed electric candles on posts, like we do today
with street lights, the Americans had the idea of lighting entire cities
and villages by means of a grid of towers that stood up to 300 feet (90
metres) tall.

These structures, sometimes resembling oversized oil derricks, were
equipped with 4 to 6 arc lights of 2,000 to 6,000 candle power each.
Most of them burnt all night and all year (except at full moon) although
some cities turned the lights off around midnight.



The [first arc light
tower](http://www.sanjose.com/underbelly/unbelly/Sanjose/Tower/tower1.html)
was erected in San José, California, in December 1881 (above). It stood
237 feet tall and was supplied with 6 arc lights boasting a total light
production of 24,000 candlepower (a
[replica](http://www.historysanjose.org/visiting_hsj/buildings/history_park/light_tower.html)
half the height has been built on the same spot, the original tower
collapsed in 1915 following a storm).

Eiffel tower

The idea of placing arc lights on towers did not go unnoticed in Europe.
It is believed that the Eiffel Tower in Paris, finished in 1889 and also
equipped with powerful arc lights (below), was inspired by the first San
José tower - the American city even
[sued](http://www.sanjose.com/underbelly/unbelly/Sanjose/Tower/tower11.html)
Paris ([in
1989!](http://gocalifornia.about.com/od/casivalley/a/electower.htm)),
unsuccessfully.



During the 1880s and 1890s, dozens of American cities built an
infrastructure of arc light towers on their territory. Placing arc
lights on high towers made sense. One of the main disadvantages of
electric candles was their labour-intensive operation. The carbon rods
had to be replaced every one or two hours. That would make arc lights as
cumbersome as candles, gas lights or oil lamps, were it not for the fact
that they were so much brighter.

Arc light kills a smoker

By grouping them on towers, this carbon trimming could be done with much
[less man
power](http://www.signonsandiego.com/uniontrib/20080607/news_1cz7history.html)
than was needed for other systems (including arc lights placed on poles
or hung at intersections). Moonlight towers were also the most energy
efficient way of lighting a whole city, because a minimal amount of
lamps was needed, so that everything taken together the lighting tower
system was the cheapest available method to light a complete city.

The tower system also had the advantage of safety. Witness this report
from the New York Times, [Arc light kills a
smoker](http://query.nytimes.com/gst/abstract.html?res=9E04EFDD1738E033A25752C0A9639C946697D6CF)
(1907):

*“Joseph Gooden was instantly killed by an electric shock today while he
was attempting to light a cigar from an arc lamp in the street. With
several companions he was returning from a dance when, in a spirit of
bravado, he lowered one of the big electric street lamps and put his
cigar against one of the carbons. He received a shock of 2,000 volts.”*

 Detroit as a shining example

*
most American cities the lighting tower infrastructure was combined with
arc lamps placed on poles or hung at intersections, and complemented
with gas or and oil lamps, or incandescents. Detroit was the only large
city in the US (and in the world) lighted wholly and exclusively by the
tower system.

Detroit placed 122 towers (see illustration at left and at right) with a
height of 100 to 180 feet, lighting 21 square miles of the city. All
towers were installed in the 1880s and remained in use up to the end of
the 1910s.

The lighting infrastructure in Detroit was regarded as the future of
street lighting, and stood as an example for the rest of the US. The
following excerpts are taken from “Municipal lighting”, a practical
guide for city lighting that was published in 1888:

 “*The press of the country has uniformly conceded* *Detroit* *to be the
best-lighted city in the world. All its streets, yards, backyards and
grounds are illuminated as effectually as by the full moon at the
zenith. The blending of light from the mass of towers serves to prevent
dense shadows.”*Detroit has about 230,000
inhabitants, and has a dense business section of about one square mile.
This section has about 20 towers, which average 1,000 to 1,200 feet
apart. The belt immediately contiguous, embracing the closely-built and
densely shaded residence section has its towers about 2,000 feet apart.
Beyond this the spaces widen to 2,500 feet apart, and in the suburbs
they are spaced about 2,500 to 3,000 feet apart.”*

 Towers: the best buy

*“The last gas estimate for the 7.5 square miles lighted was 104,300
dollars. The amount paid the past year for lighting 21 square miles by
the tower system was about 112,000 dollar. The tower lights are burned
from dusk to daylight every night in the year. The same service from
2,600 pole lights would amount to 332,150 dollar per year."*

*“Lighting by the tower system is assuming great prominence, and merits
the calm and thoughtful consideration of all interested in the subject
of public lighting. It is the only system thus far presented which
affords a thoroughly practical illumination of all spaces at a figure
below the cost of gas or naphtha, as the latter is usually employed for
quite inadequately lighting the streets alone.”*

Guidelines

The [success in
Detroit](http://query.nytimes.com/mem/archive-free/pdf?_r=1&res=9F01EFDD153FE533A25753C2A96E9C94649FD7CF)
led to a detailed set of guidelines, to be followed by other American
cities. How many towers are needed? The book explains in detail:

*"Towns of 3,000 to 6,000 inhabitants, occupying, say, a square mile of
space, may be lighted in every quarter by 7 towers, one at the center
and six at the angles of a hexagon, the towers being 2,000 feet apart.
So, also, illumination may be had by five towers, there being one at the
center and four at the angles of a square, the towers being 2,000 feet
from the middle tower, and where greater economy is desirable there
might be four towers, one at the center and one at each of the angles of
a triangle and about 2,000 feet from the center tower."*From 100,000 to
200,000 inhabitants: 100 to 150 towers.* *More than 200,000 inhabitants:
150 to 300 towers."*

 *"The towers should, as far as practicable, be arranged in a triangular
system. In all cases it is recommended that the towers should have at
least four lights of 2,000 candlepower each. The central towers might
have six lights."*

Dark corners

The guidebook acknowledges that towers are in many cases best
complemented by other arc lights, preferably placed at intersections
(see illustration below):

*"It will rarely happen that the tower system can be used exclusively in
any place. There will always be dark corners that cannot be reached
except at great expense, and in such localities a single low light is
used with good effect."*

*"Placing lamps over the intersection of streets is the best method when
low arc lighting is desired. By placing a lamp over the intersection of
a street, you place the lamp where it can do the most possible good, as
it can light the streets equally in four directions a distance of about
400 feet radius of the lamp.”*



Disadvantages of the tower system

Not everybody was convinced of the tower system, however. In one chapter
of the book, local authorities are asked for their experiences with the
moonlight towers. As well as many positive (and sometimes ecstatic)
comments, some responses were very negative. In Ogden, Utah, for
instance:

*“The tower system of electric lighting was tried here several years
ago, and discarded as being a complete failure. It is a bad system for
street lighting, being impossible to erect a tower high enough to throw
the lights in the streets uniformly. One side of the streets will be
shaded by the buildings, which produces an intense darkness (when
contrasted by the light on the opposite side), which is very
disagreeable. Our city is now lighted by electric lamps placed in the
center of the street.”*

Others had a more balanced opinion. Council Bluffs, Iowa:

*“The light is certainly an improvement on the gas lamps. The light is
about the same that would be expected from a half moon. You can notice
the removal of a brick, stone or plank on the sidewalk, as you walk
along. Still, there are people who complain that the light is not
sufficiently bright.”*

Saginaw, Michigan:

*“I should never use towers in thickly settled parts, where streets are
all built up on both sides with high buildings: even three story
buildings appear to destroy the effect of light sideways. Towers do well
in wide streets, and will range 1,500 to 2,000 feet each side.”*

Utica, New York:



The decline of moonlight towers

The criticism of some local authorities in 1888 already showed what
would eventually be the death-sentence of the lighting tower system: the
arrival of ever higher buildings. The first decades of the 20th century
were the era of the skyscraper, and those buildings were incompatible
with moonlight towers. Lighting towers that were higher than 150 feet,
like the first one in San José, proved
[ineffective](http://www.sanjose.com/underbelly/unbelly/Sanjose/Tower/tower5.html).
From the guidebook:

*“The advantages of the tower system are only realized when the lamps
are placed high enough above the trees and buildings, that they may
radiate their light without obstructions near the lamps. The lamps
should not be at so great an elevation as that their light will be
dissipated in the air before reaching the ground. In the matter of
proper height, 150 feet is the most satisfactory. Increasing the height
impairs the illumination near the foot and does not perceptibly increase
the total lighted area, while diminishing its height diminishes the
illuminated area and affords unnecessary brilliance at the base.”*

Life expectancy

Improvements in arc lamp design were another reason for the decline of
the tower system. In the 1890s the carbon consumption of the rods was
slowed down considerably by enclosing the lamp in a gas tube, which
increased the life expectancy of the carbon sticks fivefold – enough to
make the rods last all night.

That made it possible to maintain arc lights in streets and on
intersections with more or less the same amount of man power than what
was needed for the towers. More lamps were required in that case, which
made the system slightly more expensive, but the distribution of light
was much better.

Later arc lights could burn for 100 to 150 hours (4 to 6 days) without
replacing the rods. Also, the irritating sound production of arc light,
another disadvantage of low arc lighting, was largely solved in the
1890s.

Incandescents & LEDs

Another reason for the decline of the moonlight towers was the fact that
alternative electric systems, notably the incandescents of Edison, were
improved substantially. Again, the advantage was a better distribution
of light, which justified slightly higher costs. This was already
acknowledged in 1888:

*“The advantage of the greater candle power of the arc light is offset
by the much better distribution of the incandescent, so that all things
considered the incandescent is not at such disadvantage as would appear
from the mere comparison of the candle power of the different lights”.*

The merit of Edison was that he succeeded in dividing the intense light
of the arc lamp in smaller units, so that electric lighting eventually
became suited for use inside buildings, even in small rooms. The current
development of LED-lights faces the opposite challenge as that of early
electric lighting: to create a bright white light that is *strong*
enough to compete with incandescents and fluorescents.



Film projectors and search lights

Most lighting towers were demolished during the first two decades of the
20th century (quite a few also collapsed during storms and tornados, or
were destroyed by bus drivers misjudging a turn). The [only ones that
remain](http://texashistory.unt.edu/search/?q=moonlight+towers&t=dc.subject)
today are [17](http://www.austinpostcard.com/moontower.html) (of
[originally
31](http://www.barrypopik.com/index.php/new_york_city/entry/moonlight_towers_moonlight_city_austin_nickname/))
towers in Austin, Texas – they are still working, albeit not by means of
arc lights. Lighting towers are still used today, of course, during
events and on traffic junctions and construction sites for instance, but
they too make use of more advanced lamps.

Arc lights lasted longer than arc light towers – in London they were
still found on the streets in the 1950s. They also found new
applications, notably as film projectors and searchlights. Carbon arc
searchlights arrived on the market in 1915 and thousands of them - much
more powerful than those used for city lighting - were applied in World
War II during military operations. In the 1920s, arc lights were
marketed as family health products as a substitute for sunlight.

Compact Fluorescents

Even today, the technology still lives on in a more sophisticated form.
Most street lamps and followspots in use today, and even fluorescent
compact bulbs and neon lights, are [descendants of the electric
candle](http://www.sheldonbrown.com/marty_light_hist.html). Another
important technology that has developed out of arc lighting, is welding.
This explains why it is not advised to build an arc light yourself
(which is a fairly easy thing to do) because staring at the arc from
nearby can damage your eyes.

© Kris De Decker (edited by Vincent Grosjean).

Keep in touch: subscribe by
[feed](http://feeds.feedburner.com/typepad/krisdedecker/lowtechmagazineenglish)
or
[email](http://www.feedburner.com/fb/a/emailverifySubmit?feedId=1685209&loc=en_US).

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
   
   
   
   
 ------------------------------------------------------------------------

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------



More information and illustrations (in order of importance) :

-   De Bliksem Getemd, Leonard De Vries, 1979
-   Municipal Lighting, Fred H. Whipple, 1888
-   [The New York Times article
    archive](http://www.nytimes.com/ref/membercenter/nytarchive.html)
-   [Exhibiting
    Electricity](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0852968957?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0852968957)![](http://www.assoc-amazon.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=as2&o=1&a=0852968957){width="1"
    height="1"}, K.G. Beauchamp, 1997
-   [Explaining the collapse of the British electrical supply
    industry](http://www.h-net.org/%7Ebusiness/bhcweb/publications/BEHprint/v022n1/p0318-p0327.pdf),
    Business and Economic History, fall 1993
-   [Moonlight tower,
    Wikipedia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Moonlight_tower)
-   [Electric Universe: The Shocking True Story of
    Electricity](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/1400045509?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=1400045509),
    David Bodanis, 2005

More at Low-tech Magazine :

-   [Medieval
    smokestacks]({filename}/posts/peat-and-coal-fossil-fuels-in-pre-industrial-times.md):
    fossil fuels in pre-industrial times
-   [Viva Las
    Vegas]({filename}/posts/led-light-cfl-b.md)
    : LED's and the energy efficiency paradox
-   [Email in the 18th
    century]({filename}/posts/email-in-the-18.md)
    : the optical telegraph
-   [Small windmills put to the
    test]({filename}/posts/small-windmills-test-results.md)
    : size matters
-   [Hoffmann
    kilns]({filename}/posts/hoffmann-kilns-brick-and-tile-production.md)
    : giant oven stoves in the 19th century
-   [Trolley canal
    boats]({filename}/posts/trolley-canal-boats.md)
    : wired shipping
-   [Electric generators from the
    1800s](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/dynamos-electric.html) : a
    gallery of illustrations

<!-- -->

-   [Low-tech
    solutions](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/low-tech-solutions.html)
-   [Obsolete
    technology](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/obsolete-technology.html)
-   [Ecotech myths](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/ecotech-myths.html)

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
