Title: Life without airplanes: from London to New York in 3 days and 12 hours
Date: 2008-06-04 14:31
Author: Kris De Decker
Category: Obsolete Technology
Slug: ocean-liners
Status: published



Flying has become cheaper than taking a train or driving a car. Yet,
environmental concerns, dwindling fuel reserves and fast rising kerosene
prices are threatening to turn airline travel into a privilege for the
rich again. This should not mean the end of mass travel or tourism,
however.Before mass air travel took off in the 1960s, people crossed the
globe in majestic passenger ships. Reintroducing ocean liners would be
more than a nostalgic move: it could be a much more energy efficient
(yet slower) way to travel.

  
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

"If we would stuff people in the 'Queen Mary 2' like we fold passengers
into airplane seats, the ship could transport more than 500,000 people"

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Airlines all over the world are
[struggling](http://blog.wired.com/cars/2008/06/the-internation.html) to
[lower the energy
consumption](http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2008/jun/03/theairlineindustry.eads?gusrc=rss&feed=technologyfull)
of their machines - by designing lighter planes and more efficient
engines, by getting rid of needless weight inside the cabin, or [by
flying](http://www.spacedaily.com/reports/Belgian_airline_says_it_will_cut_costs_emissions_by_slowing_down_999.html)
[at lower
speeds](http://www.themoscowtimes.com/article/1009/42/362470.htm). At
the same time, they started investigating alternative fuels like algae,
coconut oil, hydrogen and solar power. None of these things will save
cheap airline travel when kerosene prices keep going up, though. There
is a limit to energy efficiency, and alternative fuels for airplanes are
highly speculative; maybe we should first try and see if we could run
our cars on “green” fuels [without destroying the
environment]({filename}/posts/algae-fuel-biof.md)
before we try to implement them in jumbo jets. There is [no alternative
for
kerosene](http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2008/mar/15/britishairwaysbusiness.globalflyer).

Ocean liners

It has been said that there are no alternatives to airplanes either,
when it comes to long distance travel. This might be true, but this
alternative once existed and it disappeared because of planes. From the
mid-19th century to the 1960s, millions of people crossed the oceans on
passenger ships. Many [hundreds of ocean
liners](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_ocean_liners) were built.
Most of these passenger ships were rather small and slow, but the
superliners travelling the North Atlantic between Europe and North
America were fast vessels with a much larger passenger capacity than
that of a present plane
([these](http://www.greatoceanliners.net/)[sites](http://www.ocean-liners.com/)
have a good overview of historical ocean liners).



Motorised ships (first running on ~~steam~~ coal, later on diesel)
brought a spectacular improvement in speed and reliability. While a
sailing ship needed [one to two
months]({filename}/posts/cargo-ships-then-and-now.md)
to cross the Atlantic, the first steamships made the journey in just 15
days. Steamships also made travelling times predictable, so that regular
services could be established. Both speed and passenger capacity went up
fast during the following one hundred years. The [SS United
States](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SS_United_States) *(illustration
above)*, which was in service from 1952 to 1969, still holds the record
for the fastest ocean liner ever built: she (ocean liners are female)
crossed the Atlantic in 3 days and 12 hours, at a speed of more than 54
km/h. That’s 10 to 20 times faster than a sailing ship.

Contrary to present cruise ships, ocean liners were built for speed.
Nations were in a [constant
race](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blue_Riband) to possess the fastest
passenger ship.Ocean liners brought thousands of European immigrants to
the US, Australia and Canada. They caused a modest tourist boom in the
1920s and they served as the most important means of transportation
between European countries and their colonies. Yet, the fast growth of
ocean liner traffic came to a rather abrupt end when cheap and fast air
travel took off. Propeller driven aircraft like the DC-3, which were
used in the 1930s and 1940s, revolutionised travel at medium distances,
but their speed (240km/h) and range (1,650 km) were still too limited to
present a danger for transatlantic ocean liners. With the arrival of jet
powered planes at the end of the 1950s, however, ocean liners lost their
reason for existence.

The death of distance

Most passenger ships were taken out of service in the 1960s - [some were
converted to cruise
ships](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SS_France_%281961%29). Travelling at
speeds of 900 km/h, jet powered planes lowered the travelling time
between New York and London to less than 8 hours – 10 times faster than
the SS United States. Jet engines killed distance: today, at least in
theory, every place on Earth can be reached in less than 24 hours time.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

"Ferries take not only passengers on board but also their cars. Since
the cars take more space and weigh more than the passengers, this is a
very inefficient way of transporting people"

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

However, it is interesting to note that distances shrunk at least as
much by switching from sailing ships to ocean liners (which also
introduced predictable travelling times) as they did by changing from
ocean liners to planes.Today, there is only one ship left that services
transatlantic crossings: the [Queen Mary
2](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/RMS_Queen_Mary_2). Taking this gigantic
ship as an example, replacing air travel by ocean liners does not seem
to make a big difference. At service speed, the ship has an engine
output of 90,000 kilowatts. Since she can take 2,620 passengers, this
comes down to 34 kilowatts per passenger.

A Boeing 747 has an average engine output of 65,000 kilowatts and can
transport about 500 passengers. This comes down to 130 kilowatts per
passenger (for comparison: cars can have a maximum engine output from 50
to 300 kilowatts and more). Thus, to transport one passenger across the
Atlantic, a plane needs 4 times more engine power than a ship. Energy
output does not say all there is to say about fuel consumption however,
since it does not take into account the duration of the trip ([see
comments](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2008/06/ocean-liners.html#comments))
and the fuel efficiency of the engines. It says even less about the
emissions of toxic fumes and CO2, because marine engines burn much
dirtier fuel than aeroplanes. Therefore, to make a case for a revival of
ocean liners, more spectacular gains are needed. These are not hard to
find.

Sardines

While passengers in a plane are squeezed together like sardines, the use
of space on a ship like the Queen Mary 2 is far from optimal. The ship
might have the speed of an ocean liner, but she is built like a cruise
vessel. The Queen Mary 2 [shows
off](http://www.cunard.com/OurShips/default.asp?Ship=QM2&main=phg&sub=)
15 restaurants and bars, 5 swimming pools, a casino, a ballroom, a
theatre and a planetarium, to give some examples. It has cabins with
balconies. In a plane, each passenger is folded into a seat - and that’s
it.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

cross-section of the Queen Mary 2 compared to the Titanic and to the
Airbus A 380, currently the largest passenger plane with a capacity of
up to 850
people.*----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

500,000 passengers

How many passengers would fit in the Queen Mary 2 if they would have as
less space and leisure options as the passengers of a large jumbo jet?
The ship has a gross tonnage of almost 150,000 GT – [gross
tonnage](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tonnage) is a measure determining
the internal volume (or enclosed space) of a ship, and comprises all
spaces including engine rooms and crew cabins for instance. On the Queen
Mary 2, this comes down to 57 gross tonnes per passenger. A Boeing 747
has [a gross tonnage of 129
GT](http://www.centennialofflight.gov/essay/Aerospace/Boeing_747/Aero21.htm)
– which comes down to 0.26 gross tonnes per passenger. If we would stuff
people in the Queen Mary 2 like we fold passengers in airplane seats,
the ship could transport more than 500,000 people.

This would make transatlantic shipping definitely more eco-friendly than
air travel, even without cleaner and more efficient engines. The Queen
Mary 2 transporting 500,000 people would boil down to a power output of
0.18 kilowatts per passenger – comparable to the output of a
well-trained cyclist and 700 times more efficient than the engine power
per passenger of an airplane. Taking into account the duration of the
voyages, the ship scores 70 times better than the plane.

Staten Island Ferry

Surprisingly, there are a few passenger boats that achieve similar
figures. The best example is the [Staten
Island](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Staten_Island_Ferry)[ferry](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Staten_Island_Ferry),
a passenger service that runs between Manhattan and Staten Island in New
York. Ferries generally make far from optimal use of space, because
almost all of them take not only passengers on board but also their
cars. Since the cars take more space and weigh more than the passengers,
ferries are a very inefficient way of transporting people (some of them
are also as luxurious as cruise ships). Yet, the Staten Island ferry
does not take cars (anymore).



These ferries – which have a passenger capacity of up to 6,000 people -
have a gross tonnage per passenger of 0.38 to 0.55 GT. That’s only
slightly more than the available space on a jumbo jet.Of course, a trip
on the Staten Island ferry only takes 25 minutes, and crossing the
Atlantic folded in an airplane seat takes less than 10 hours. Stuffing
500,000 people in the Queen Mary would be a bit optimistic, because the
trip would take more than 3 days – a bit of walking space might be very
welcome. Transporting more passengers also means you have to take more
food and more lifeboats, and it would mean significantly more garbage.
Therefore, let’s change those 500,000 theoretical passengers into only
30,000 passengers. This is not a random number.

A realistic option: 30,000 passengers

The [Queen Mary 1](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/RMS_Queen_Mary), who
sailed the Atlantic from 1936 to 1967, was just like many other ocean
liners converted to a troopship in World War II, often transporting as
many as 15,000 American soldiers. On one trip she took 16,082 soldiers –
the largest amount of passengers ever transported on one vessel.The
gross tonnage of the Queen Mary 2 is almost two times larger than that
of the Queen Mary 1, so it must be possible to transport 2 x 15,000 =
30,000 people on a ship like the Queen Mary 2. This would come down to 5
gross tonnes per passenger and 3 kilowatts of engine power per
passenger.



These figures closely resemble those of the earlier ocean liners at the
end of the 19th and the beginning of the 20th century. The [SS Kaiser
Wilhelm der
Gro](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SS_Kaiser_Wilhelm_der_Gro%C3%9Fe)[ß](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SS_Kaiser_Wilhelm_der_Gro%C3%9Fe)[e](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SS_Kaiser_Wilhelm_der_Gro%C3%9Fe),
a German ocean liner launched in 1896, had a gross tonnage of only
14,350 GT but could take 1,506 passengers, which comes down to a gross
tonnage per passenger of only 9.5 GT. Even the infamous
[Titanic](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Titanic) had a gross tonnage of
only 18.5 tonnes per passenger.

If the passengers of the Queen Mary 2 would have the same moving space
as the passengers of the (luxurious) Titanic, the ship could still hold
more than 8,000 people, three times more than its capacity today (more,
in fact, since older steamships had much larger engine rooms).
Therefore, transporting 30,000 people on the QM2 is far from unrealistic
or uncomfortable
([this](http://lcweb2.loc.gov/cgi-bin/query/i?pp/ils:@field%28NUMBER+@band%28cph+3a44236%29%29:displayType=1:m856sd=cph:m856sf=3a44236)
is uncomfortable). You would need 60 Jumbo Jets to transport 30,000
people.

Travel in a peak oil world

Every one of those 30,000 passengers on the Queen Mary 2 would have 20
times as much space than a passenger on a plane, while at the same time
consuming 43 times less engine power (taking the view that both engines
has similar efficiency). Taking into account the duration of the trip,
the ship is 4 times more energy efficient than the plane.Now this looks
like an option that could be useful in a peak oil world.

If flying would become too expensive for most of us, passenger ships
might continue to provide mass travel and tourism at a democratic price.
We would pay another price, of course: the world would become
[bigger]({filename}/posts/speed-energy.md)
again. London and New York will be 3 days and 12 hours apart. Engineers
could design faster ships, but only at the expense of [much higher fuel
consumption](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2008/09/speed-energy.html#wavedrag).
The majority of fast ships
([hovercraft](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hovercraft),
[catamarans](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Catamaran),
[hydrofoils](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hydrofoil)) were taken out of
service because of high fuel costs.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

"Unfortunately, governments and businesses prefer to keep up their faith
in larger airports and faster planes as if there is no alternative"

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Switching back to ocean liners would surely lower long distance
passenger travel and change life as we know it, but it would not be the
end of modern civilization, nor the end of tourism or business. A
weekend of shopping in Paris will be hard if you live in New York and
only have 3 days free. But you could still get anywhere you want, if you
take the time.Unfortunately, governments and businesses prefer to keep
up their belief in ever larger airports and ever faster planes (like the
[Lapcat](http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2008/feb/05/theairlineindustry.travelnews))
as if there is no alternative. We are running out of fuel, guys - time
to change course.

Dirty fuel

One very important note: replacing planes by ocean liners would be an
ecologically sound idea, but only if marine engines become cleaner. Most
ships make use of very dirty (unrefined) diesel oil that needlessly
poisons the air and heats up the atmosphere. This is not a technological
but a political problem. All we need is (much) stronger regulation
([which is on its
way](http://goingcoastal.wordpress.com/2008/03/19/new-rules-clean-up-dirty-ships/)).
Wind energy and solar energy can also help to lower the fuel consumption
of ships (see
[these]({filename}/posts/sailing-ship-re.md)
[articles]({filename}/posts/sailing-ships-large-crew-automated-control.md)
on Low-tech Magazine). Other issues to consider are wastewater treatment
and garbage disposal – again things that should not be harmful, but at
the moment they are because of a lack of sufficient laws and control
(read more about the rather sickening practices of cruise ships
[here](http://www.bluewaternetwork.org/campaign_ss_cruises.shtml)).

© Kris De Decker (edited by Vincent Grosjean)

Pictures & illustrations: [SS Normandie
(intro)](http://www.marinersinternational.com/gallery.html) / [SS United
States &
Mauretania](http://www.oldstratforduponavon.com/oceanliners.html) /
Others from [Wikipedia](http://www.wikipedia.org/)

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Related articles :[](http://)

-   [Sailing at the touch of a
    button]({filename}/posts/sailing-ships-large-crew-automated-control.md)
    : wind powered, computer controlled
-   [Cargo ships, then and
    now]({filename}/posts/cargo-ships-then-and-now.md)
    : which one is fastest?
-   [The age of
    speed]({filename}/posts/speed-energy.md) :
    how to reduce global fuel consumption by 75 percent
-   [Green, slow air
    cargo]({filename}/posts/green-slow-air.md) :
    airships
-   [Only idiots travel by
    train]({filename}/posts/train-travel.md) :
    how can you blame people for flying if there is no affordable
    alternative?
-   [Camping in the
    clouds]({filename}/posts/gipsy-zeppelin-baseship.md)
    : the zeppelin that never lands
-   [Sailrockets](http://www.notechmagazine.com/2009/05/sailing-rockets.html)
    &
    [kiteboats](http://www.notechmagazine.com/2009/04/kiteboating.html)
-   [Trolley canal
    boats]({filename}/posts/trolley-canal-boats.md)
-   [How to downsize a transport
    network]({filename}/posts/the-chinese-wheelbarrow.md):
    the Chinese wheelbarrow

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
