Title: Medieval smokestacks: fossil fuels in pre-industrial times
Date: 2011-09-29 01:27
Author: Kris De Decker
Category: Obsolete Technology
Tags: coal, fossil fuels, history, middle ages, peat
Slug: peat-and-coal-fossil-fuels-in-pre-industrial-times
Status: published


The history of energy use in human civilisation is generally summarised
as follows: from Antiquity until the start of the Industrial Revolution,
people made use of the manual labour of both animals and humans, as well
as biomass, sun, water and wind.

Next, all these renewable energy sources were replaced by fossil fuels:
first coal, and later oil and gas. Uranium completed the picture in the
second half of the twentieth century.

While this historical summary is basically correct, there were some -
rather important - exceptions. Almost all of the leading economies in
Western Europe during the last millenium relied on a large-scale use of
fossil fuels such as peat and coal.

Illustration: peat fuelled glass manufacturing in the Netherlands,
1700s.

> Our romantic image of the Middle Ages and Renaissance as a paradise of
> renewable technologies results largely because of our failure to
> distinguish between thermal and kinetic energy.

Before we delve into the pre-industrial history of fossil fuels, it is
important to note the difference between thermal energy (heat) and
kinetic energy (motion). For the greater part of history, wind, water
and muscle power could provide only kinetic energy. This was the kind of
energy required to grind grain, saw wood, or set sailboats in motion.
For centuries, wood (and charcoal made of wood) was the only source of
thermal energy in Europe, apart from the use of direct solar energy for
low-temperature processes like the drying of mud bricks and food crops.
Wood or charcoal were required for activities such as heating buildings,
cooking food, producing building materials (such as bricks, tile,
cement, lime and plaster), manufacturing glass and paper, forging iron
or producing dyes and soaps. At the same time, wood was the main
construction material for buildings, ships, bridges, mills, piers,
wharves, cranes, winches, mine shafts, vehicles, barrels, furniture and
tools.


The invention of the steam engine in the 18th century meant that thermal
energy could be converted into kinetic energy: the heat generated by the
burning of coal was used to power machines and vehicles. Likewise, the
arrival of electricity in the 19th century allowed kinetic energy to be
converted into thermal energy: a windmill, for instance, could be used
to drive a generator that delivers energy to an electric oven, or
heater. (Kinetic energy could produce heat by friction, for example in
windmill gears, but this was mostly wasted).

These days, it is self-evident that both types of energy can be
converted to one another (with considerable [efficiency
losses]({filename}/posts/bike-powered-electricity-generators.md)),
but for most of human history kinetic energy and heat energy were
entirely different and were treated separately. Then, [just as
now]({filename}/posts/solar-powered-factories.md),
thermal energy was much more important than kinetic energy.

Urban revival

The Romans - who fuelled practically all their mechanical activities
with slave labour - deforested large parts of Europe in their hunger for
thermal energy and construction materials. When their empire collapsed,
forests recovered during the half millenium that is termed the Dark
Ages. But at the beginning of the second millenium AD, Europe became the
setting of an urban revival. Between 500 and 1000 AD, some important
agricultural innovations occured, including improved ploughs, the
triennal rotation of crops, the horse collar, and the horse shoe.

These technologies enabled a larger population and higher food surplus:
more food could be supplied with less labour, which further aided the
growth of cities in which people could do things other than working the
land. The invention of the printing press, for example, further
increased the demand for wood. Similarly, building [gothic
cathedrals](http://www.notechmagazine.com/2011/09/how-to-build-medieval-city.html)
required tonnes of materials, raising thermal energy use.

Urbanisation thus went hand in hand with increased industrial acitivity.
Also, medieval industrial processes were less efficient than [similar
processes
today](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/what-is-the-embodied-energy-of-materials.html).
For example: up to 20 kg of charcoal (with an energy content of 600 MJ)
was used to produce 1 kg of iron (compared to 20-25 MJ/kg today).
Urbanisation and industrialisation increased rapidly between 1100 and
1300, which again resulted in widespread deforestation.

Windmills are only half of the story

Our romantic image of the Middle Ages and Renaissance as a paradise of
renewable technologies results largely because of our failure to
distinguish between thermal and kinetic energy. The Dutch and the
Flemish, who dominated the Western European economy from about 1100 to
1700, are famous for their impressive use of wind technology, which took
off in the 1100s.


The most spectacular use of windmills appeared in Holland from the late
1500s (16th century) onwards. There, the Dutch applied wind power to a
wide range of industrial processes, including paper production, wood
sawing, glass polishing and cement production. (See the article: "[Wind
powered factories: the history and future of the industrial
windmill]({filename}/posts/history-of-industrial-windmills.md)").

The industrial windmill was a marvel of pre-industrial technology, but
it explains only partly why Holland became the most important economic
power in the world during the 17th century. While sustainable providers
of power, windmills could only deliver kinetic energy. To give just one
example: you can use wind power to polish glass, but you can't make
glass using a windmill. For that, you need thermal energy. And in
pre-industrial times, as the history books tell us, the only way to
reach high temperatures was to burn wood.

One problem, though: virtually all forests in the region had long
vanished by the 1600s. Yet, during the Golden Age of the Netherlands,
the Dutch not only made glass, they also produced bricks, tiles,
ceramics and clay pipes, they refined salt and sugar, bleached linen,
boiled soap, brewed beer, distilled spirits and baked bread. All these
processes were based on a massive input of thermal energy.

> While peat is classified by the IPCC as a renewable fuel, this is
> highly debatable. It takes at least 3000 years for a peat layer of 3 m
> to return to its original size.

Moreover, the Dutch produced much more than needed for domestic
consumption. They became the largest European exporters of many of the
above-mentioned industrially manufactured products. On a more modest
scale, a similar production boom had happened in Flanders a few
centuries earlier, in which an energy-intensive industry appeared in the
near total absence of wood reserves. So how did the Dutch and the
Flemish achieve this? By mining peat on a truly massive scale.

[](http://krisdedecker.typepad.com/.a/6a00e0099229e888330154357bafa5970c-pi)

What is peat?

[](http://krisdedecker.typepad.com/.a/6a00e0099229e888330154357bafa5970c-pi)

An intermediate step in the formation of coal, peat forms when plant
material, usually in marshy areas, does not decay fully because of a
lack of oxygen. This semicarbonised fuel can be found near the earth's
surface in layers of up to 5 metres thick.



The energy density of dried and pressed peat - known as "turf" - is
about 15 to 17 MJ per kg, which is similar to the energy density of
dried wood (15 to 18 MJ/kg) but lower than that of coal (24 MJ/kg) or
charcoal (up to 29 MJ/kg). However, it is a bulkier fuel than wood: 1m3
of coal provides 6 times as much heat as 1m3 of turf, for instance.

Turf is still used today in some countries, notably in Ireland, Finland
and Russia, where it is burned in power plants and used for domestic
heating. While peat is classified by the IPCC as a renewable fuel, this
is highly debatable. Peat is renewed at a rate of about 1 mm per year at
most, and so it takes at least 3000 years for a peat layer of 3 m to
return to its original size - and only if the land is not disturbed in
that time. In addition, the mining of peat has a very large impact on
the landscape, as we shall see, while the burning of turf produces
slightly more CO2-emissions than coal for the same energy content. The
only advantage it has over coal is that it produces less smoke and has a
lower sulfur content, and thus produces less air pollution than coal.

How to dig peat

[](http://krisdedecker.typepad.com/.a/6a00e0099229e888330154357bafa5970c-pi)

In pre-industrial times, peat was dug out using [very simple
tools](http://www.mot.be/w/1/index.php/IDDOC-Crafts-En/Peat-cutter).
Before being cut, the peat was often partially dehydrated by digging
drainage trenches on its surface. Next, the land was stripped of its
vegetation and the peat sods were cut up vertically to the required
size.

[](http://krisdedecker.typepad.com/.a/6a00e0099229e888330154357bafa5970c-pi)


following step was to cut out the peat sods horizontally, after which
they were loaded onto wheelbarrows and transported to a nearby field.
There, they were laid out or stacked up vertically in a formation for
drying. It took six to eight weeks for the peat sods to become dry
enough to be used as fuel, after which they were beaten or trodden to
make them more compact. During the drying process in the field, the peat
sods were turned regularly. Finally, the peat (now called turf) was
loaded in baskets and carried to the farm or the market.

Mining peat was a seasonal activity that took about 3 months per year,
from late spring to early summer. Starting production earlier than April
was risky because frost could damage the drying peat. Digging peat in
summer was equally risky because there was a chance that it would not be
dry enough following a cold and wet season. Likewise, a very hot summer
could make the peat useless if it was not taken away from the drying
field quickly enough - it would then be dispersed by the wind.


could thus argue that peat has the disadvantages of both a fossil fuel
and a renewable fuel, without any of the benefits. Like other better
known fossil fuels, it is a non-renewable energy source that produces
large amounts of CO2, yet it has an energy density that is much lower
than other fossil fuels. On the other hand, peat digging is a seasonal
activity with a "harvest" that may fail because of the weather. And yet,
because they had no other choice, the Dutch and the Flemish built their
entire economy around it.

The evolution of peat production

The evolution of peat production was eerily similar to the mining of
fossil fuels today. When the easiest accessible reserves were exhausted,
the peat diggers developed new technologies and methods to mine
harder-to-reach resources at an ever increasing financial and
environmental cost. We do not have much detailed knowledge about peat
production in Flanders and Brabant, because few written records from the
late Middle Ages remain. However, the history of peat production in the
present-day Netherlands is relatively well documented.

Bruges, Antwerp, Amsterdam

The urban revival of the late Middle Ages started in Northern Italy,
where the dominating merchant cities were Venice, Milan, Genoa and
Florence. However, around 1100 a second urban core developed east of the
North Sea, a region that would become known as the "Low Countries" from
the 15th century onwards. This region would soon rival the economic
power of the Italian cities, and become the leading economic and
industrial centre in Europe from about 1500 to 1700.


cities of Bruges, Ghent and Ypres in the province of Flanders (today a
portion of Belgium) were the first to develop. Bruges, in particular,
became an economic powerhouse due to its position in international
trade, finance and cloth production. In 1350, Bruges and Ghent boasted a
population of 90,000 and 57,000 inhabitants respectively (compared to
1,000 in Amsterdam, for instance). The picture shows the Bruges town
hall, built in 1376. (Picture by
[Pantchoa](http://www.flickr.com/photos/francois-2/5395519921/)).

Around 1500, economic power shifted to the cities of Antwerp, Brussels
and Leuven (today all in Belgium) in the province of Brabant. Antwerp
became the economic centre of the Western world, a position it would
maintain until the end of the 1500s (16th century). By 1550, Antwerp had
90,000 inhabitants, up from 40,000 in 1500, which made it the second
largest city in Europe, North of the Alps, after Paris.

In 1580, the Low Countries, then under Spanish rule, were divided into
two. The seven provinces in the South North revolted against the Spanish
and formed a new state, the Dutch Republic (the present-day
Netherlands). As a result of the subsequent chaos in the Southern
provinces (present-day Belgium), the city of Antwerp lost its leading
role and power shifted rapidly to the Dutch province of Holland, where
the capital of Amsterdam now became the European centre of economic and
industrial activity. It would remain so until the end of the 17th
century.

> When the easiest accessible reserves were exhausted, the peat diggers
> developed new technologies and methods to mine harder-to-reach
> resources at an ever increasing financial and environmental cost.

[](http://krisdedecker.typepad.com/.a/6a00e0099229e88833015435ab5cda970c-pi)[![Peat
digging above the water
table](http://krisdedecker.typepad.com/.a/6a00e0099229e888330154357cc6b4970c-320wi "Peat digging above the water table")](http://krisdedecker.typepad.com/.a/6a00e0099229e888330154357cc6b4970c-pi)Peat
mining from 1100 to 1500

[](http://krisdedecker.typepad.com/.a/6a00e0099229e88833015435ab5cda970c-pi)Large-scale
peat digging started in the coastal area of Flanders and northeast of
Antwerp in the 1100s and 1200s respectively. The activity was largely
aimed at supplying the fuel for the fast-growing cities of Bruges, Ghent
and Ypres. The reserves in the coastal peat bogs of Flanders were
exhausted by the end of the 1300s or 1400s, while peat production in
Brabant diminished sharply during the course of the fifteenth century.

By the time Antwerp came to dominate the world economy, its peat
reserves had already been dug out to satisfy the energy needs of
Flanders in the course of the preceding two centuries. As a result, peat
digging shifted to the neighbouring province of Holland, from where the
turf was exported to Antwerp. At the time, Holland was still largely an
agrarian region with relatively few energy needs. During this period, it
is estimated that between 220 and 440 hectares of peat bogs were mined
every year in Holland and Utrecht. Around 1530, the then accessible
reserves in both provinces became exhausted, while demand continued to
grow. As a result, peat prices skyrocketed.

[](http://krisdedecker.typepad.com/.a/6a00e0099229e888330154357cc6b4970c-pi)Peat
mining intensifies: peat mining below the water table

In response to this, peat diggers developed a new tool, the
"baggerbeugel" (a dredging net on a long pole, there seems to be no
English translation for the term). Standing on a small boat or at the
waterside, this tool allowed them to cut peat below water level and haul
it up. This technique, called "slagturven" (again, no English
translation available), greatly enlarged mineable peat reserves.

The peat bogs in Holland and Utrecht were up to 4.5 metres thick, but
because of the high water table in the region (why we call these the
"Low Countries"), only the top layer could be stripped away using
conventional techniques. Digging deeper would have flooded the land and
made the fuel inaccessible.


However, now that it was possible to cut peat far below the water level,
the complete peat bogs could be mined. There is evidence that the
"baggerbeugel" was already in use in Flanders two centuries earlier, and
that the knowledge of the technique was transferred to the North.


The intensification of peat production came at a cost, though. To start,
mining peat from below the water table introduced extra steps in the
processing of the fuel. Due to its increased water content, the muddy
peat had to be spread out on narrow and elongated strips of land which
were not stripped of their peat. There, the water was pressed out by
people trodding on it with boards tied beneath their clogs. Only when
this was done, could the peat be cut up in blocks and stacked to dry.

[](http://krisdedecker.typepad.com/.a/6a00e0099229e888330154357cc6b4970c-pi)Environmental
costs: land turned into water

Worse, however, was the destruction of the landscape and the loss of
agricultural land. Wherever the peat was mined below the water table,
land disappeared into the waves. This was a rather ironic consequence
for a country that spent so much effort reclaiming land on the sea
elsewhere on its territory through the use of windmills. Every year,
about 115 to 230 hectares of land was lost as a result of peat
production below the water table. The exhausted peat bogs formed lakes
that expanded to cover vast areas throughout Holland and Utrecht.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In total, peat digging would turn more than 60,000 hectares (600 km2) of
land into water in Holland and Utrecht - almost 10 percent of their
total surface area.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Only the elongated strips of land used to dehydrate the muddy peat
remained. Historian Jan de Vries (see references) notes that the area
between Amsterdam, Rotterdam and Utrecht "took on the appearance of a
veritable Swiss cheese, with dozens of water-filled, exhausted peat bogs
often separated from each other by nothing more than narrow vulnerable
strips of land on which were scattered the structures of what once had
been farms".



Some of these typical lakes still remain. The picture shows the
"Nieuwkoopse Plassen" in Holland, today a nature reserve of 1,400
hectares. Other remaining examples are the "[Loosdrechtse
plassen](http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/3/3e/Loosdrechtse_Plassen.jpg)"
and "[Vinkeveense
plassen](http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/e/ec/Vinkeveense_Plassen.jpg)"
in the province of Utrecht. Often, even the narrow ridges of land used
for drying the peat were eventually mined or simply washed away by the
waves during storms.



Things got out of hand when entire villages disappeared. Historian J.W.
De Zeeuw (see references): "Around 1600, these lakes occupied most of
the area between the rivers Oude Rijn, Gouwe and Hollandse Ijssel and
threatened the villages of Zevenhuizen, Moerkapelle and Waddinxveen. In
1630, the church of Jacobswoude, North of the Oude Rijn, was pulled down
because by then the rest of the village had been swallowed by the waves
of encircling man-made lakes."


the course of the centuries, peat digging caused the fusion of two large
lakes (the Haarlemmermeer and the Leidsemeer) and several smaller ones
in Holland, forming an inland sea of 17,000 hectares which destroyed
several villages (Nieuwerkerk, Rijk, Vijfhuizen, and a part of Aalsmeer
- see the map on the right). The water body - popularly known as the
"water wolf" - threatened the surrounding cities of Haarlem, Leiden and
Amsterdam in the 1800s, after which it was (largely) impoldered.

The authorities, horrified by the loss of agricultural land - and the
associated tax income - tried to stop the peat diggers during the
sixteenth century by placing export prohibitions and restrictions on
peat mining below the water table, but they failed. Digging out peat was
more lucrative than cultivating crops. In total, peat digging would turn
more than 60,000 hectares (600 km2) of land into water in Holland and
Utrecht - almost 10 percent of their total surface area.

Peat production moves to the North: canal digging

Again, energy demand rose significantly from the late 16th century
onwards, when economic power shifted from Flanders and Brabant to
Holland. In spite of the environmental damage, peat production in the
low peat bogs of Holland and Utrecht continued on a casual basis during
the 1600s, with an average production of 200 hectares per year. However,
this was not enough to satisfy the growing demand for the fuel, and turf
prices started rising again.


response, from the 1580s onwards, attention shifted to the somewhat
higher lying peat bogs in the northern provinces of Friesland, Groningen
and Drenthe - 200 to 250 kilometres away (see the map on the left).
There, total production during the seventeenth century would rise to an
average of almost 400 hectares per year. Most of the turf was exported
to Holland.

However, mining these reserves was a totally different matter because
there were few waterways. Transporting the turf all the way to the
Zuiderzee, from where it could be shipped to Holland and Utrecht, would
have been inordinately expensive given the transport options of the day.
In order to exploit the high peat bogs in the Northern provinces,
ditches and canals had to be dug, which required a large capital
investment.

Historian Jan de Vries: "The result was that, instead of the numerous
individual peat diggers each working small parcels of 'laagveen' \[low
bogs\], the peat in the 'hoogveen' \[high bogs\] was mined by consortia
of investors (urban capitalists from the western cities) who judged
market conditions sufficiently attractive to buy up vast tracts of
uninhabited bog, dig lengthy canals into the bogs, and hire armies of
laborers to dig the peat".

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The peat was mined by urban capitalists from the western cities who
judged market conditions sufficiently attractive to buy up vast tracts
of uninhabited bog, dig lengthy canals into the bogs, and hire armies of
labourers to dig the peat

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The maps shown here illustrate the extensive canal infrastructure that
was built in the Northern provinces of the present-day Netherlands from
the 1580s onwards. In the high peat regions of Groningen and Eastern
Drenthe, canal building continued uninterrupted from 1580 to 1650, which
opened up the main body of the peat deposit. This made some 30,000
hectares of peat available for shipping. In the high peat region of
Western Drenthe, Friesland and Overijssel, canals were dug between 1600
and 1670 to reach some 30,000 hectares of peat. In total, it is
estimated that some 700 km of canals were built in the northern
provinces, specifically aimed at turf transport. A substantial amount of
them remain, with sometimes surprising results, such as [towns without
roads](http://www.arted4life.com/breathtaking-places/giethoorn-village-in-holland-with-no-roads).



Canal building had happened before in Flanders and Brabant, where the
monasteries seem to have been the driving force behind large-scale,
organized peat production, buying up land and hiring peat diggers. In
the peat bogs in Brabant, Northeast of Antwerp, from about 1300 onwards
some 20 turf canals were dug up to 16 m above sea level, each reaching
lengths of 10 to 20 km. The main canals, which connected the export
harbours with the peat areas, attained a total length of more than 320
km. Aqueducts were built to help the canals cross the brooks. In the
Northern provinces of the Netherlands, the total length of the canals
reached at least 700 km.

Peat production versus agriculture


exploitation of the high peat bogs in the North did not always result in
the loss of agricultural land, as it did in the South. Firstly, because
the peat mining companies converted some peat bogs into permanently
agricultural land after the peat had been dug out.

J.W. De Vries: "Once the peat was stripped away, these enterprises had a
further interest in making use of the newly exposed underlying soils.
Since this soil lay above the water table, the cost of converting it
into productive agricultural land consisted primarily of taking the
trouble to conserve the surface soil (which was \[in the case of high
peat bogs\] in any event poor quality peat) so that it could be
re-spread over the land, and heavily manuring the new soil. This
occurred most systematically in Groningen, where the capital city
encouraged agricultural development of the hoogveen by subsidizing the
[distribution of night
soil]({filename}/posts/recycling-animal-and-human-dung-is-the-key-to-sustainable-farming.md)."

The new canal network created to move the turf to Holland's industry in
the South also provided low-cost transport for agriculture which, by
itself, could never have afforded such an investment. However, the
efforts to reclaim agricultural land in some parts of the country did
not make up for the much larger losses elsewhere on the territory.

Few peat bogs in Groningen were brought under cultivation during the
Golden Age - it was only with the arrival of artificial fertilizers at
the end of the nineteenth century that large-scale recultivation could
begin. In the province of Friesland, the underlying soil was not suited
for agriculture and peat digging resulted in large lakes which still
exist today. And as we have seen, vast tracts of (potential)
agricultural land disappeared in the waves in the Southern part of the
country. The result is that the Dutch became, unlike other European
countries at that time, highly dependent on food imports. They produced
vegetables, meat and dairy products, but they had to import about half
of their grain (the staple food) from the Baltic regions - a very costly
affair.

[](http://krisdedecker.typepad.com/.a/6a00e0099229e888330154357bafa5970c-pi)

Energy consumption per capita

Until the twentieth century, the Dutch stripped an estimated 283,500
hectares (2,835 square km) of peat, close to 10 percent of the total
surface of the Netherlands. However, only two thirds of this was mined
in pre-industrial times. Peat digging in the Netherlands continued until
1950 using mechanical peat diggers powered by coal, as it happened in
many other countries from the end of the nineteenth century.


If we take 1850 as the start of the "modern" peat mining era (the
Netherlands were very late to enter the Industrial Revolution), the
pre-industrial use of peat in the country amounts to just over 190,000
hectares from about 1300 to 1850. Of this, some 70,000 hectares were
mined from 1600 to 1700, which roughly corresponds with the "Golden Age"
of the Netherlands. All these figures are deduced from a 1978 paper by
J.W. de Zeeuw, "Peat and the Dutch Golden Age" (see references). Other
authors (like Jan de Vries) give higher estimates in more recent
studies, with about 275,000 hectares of peat stripped after 1600. Either
way, almost all peat that existed in the Netherlands has been mined.

De Zeeuw also calculated the heat content of the extracted peat, taking
into account the average thickness of the mined peat layers after
dehydration. He concluded that in an average year in the seventeenth
century, the Dutch consumed 25,120,800 GJ of turf. With an average
population of 1.5 million this amounts to 16.75 GJ per capita per year.

Other authors have come to similar figures, ranging from 13.4 to 19.3 GJ
per capita per year. This is similar to [dozens of poor countries
today](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_countries_by_energy_consumption_per_capita),
some of which do not even reach 10 GJ per capita. Average energy
consumption per capita worldwide was 76.6 GJ in 2008, only 4.5 times
higher than in the seventeenth century Netherlands (though the Dutch
themselves now consume much more, with 210 GJ/capita in 2003). It should
be noted that the figure of 16.75 GJ/capita only includes turf
consumption, not other energy sources like wind, animal labour,
firewood, charcoal and coal (see further).

Urbanization and industrialisation in 17th century Holland


The high energy consumption of the Dutch was an anomaly in seventeenth
century Europe. The same goes for their prosperity, and for the level of
urbanization and industrialisation in the country.

More than 60 percent of Dutch people lived in cities, compared to about
10 percent in most other European countries at the end of the 17th
century. The level of urbanisation in seventeenth century Netherlands
was only attained in other European countries at the turn of the
twentieth century. A similar development happened in Flanders and
Brabant in the 1500s, where over 30 percent of the population lived in
cities with more than 10,000 inhabitants. From about 1600 to 1720, the
Dutch had the [highest per capita income in the
world](http://www.notechmagazine.com/2011/01/medieval-england-twice-as-well-off-as-todays-poorest-nations.html)
- at least double that of neighbouring countries at the time and about
five times higher than that of the poorest countries today.

The opening of the peat bogs in the northern provinces from the 1580s
onwards meant that the Dutch had a cheap energy source that was widely
available, while most other countries in Europe were entirely dependent
on wood - which had become ever more expensive as deforestation
advanced. The Netherlands' ample fuel reserves stimulated the
development of various fuel-instensive and export-oriented industries.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

More than 60 percent of Dutch people lived in cities, compared to about
10 percent in most other European countries at the end of the 17th
century.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In several cases, the presence of these industries was solely based on
the abundant and cheap supply of thermal energy. This was the case for
sugar refinement, for example, which is a purely thermal process. Sugar
became the world's most important commodity in the seventeenth century,
and Amsterdam was Europe's largest sugar refiner by 1650. In 1662, more
than half of Europe's one hundred sugar refineries were located in the
Netherlands, all of which processed imported sugar from South America
and the Carribean.

Salt refinement too was based solely on a massive input of thermal
energy. Salt was indispensable as a preserver of meat, fish and dairy
products before electrical refrigeration was available. The Netherlands
had 293 salt refineries in 1674, most of them concentrated in Holland
and each consuming about 800 tonnes of turf per year. About sixty of
these refineries were used for packing herring barrels, another
important export. In addition, the city of Haarlem became the bleacher
of German linen, another industrial process that was purely built on
thermal energy. For all these industries, the iconic Dutch windmills did
not offer any direct advantage.



The succes of other industries, however, was based on the combination of
turf and wind power. The best example of this lies in the shipping
industry. Holland became the leading builder of ships in Europe in the
course of the seventeenth century. From 1625 to 1700, the Dutch
shipyards produced as many as 500 seafaring vessels per year, many of
them commissioned by foreign powers. The wood used to build the ships
was sawn using sophisticated wind powered saw mills invented in 1596,
while peat provided thermal energy for many shipbuilding processes, such
as bending planks, melting tar and forging iron fittings.

Apart from that, peat offered an important indirect advantage. While a
large-scale use of peat did not prevent the Dutch from importing large
amounts of wood, peat catered to their thermal energy needs, and so all
imported wood was almost exclusively used as a construction material.
This generated a much higher return on investment than its use as
firewood, and made the Dutch less vulnerable to high wood prices. Turf
was also the fuel of choice for heating homes and public buildings, and
for cooking. Only the very rich used firewood, which was much more
expensive but produced less pollution.

Why was peat only used in the Low Countries?

The Low Countries were not the only region that suffered from a severe
shortage of wood reserves between 1100 and 1700. In addition, peat was
found over large parts of Europe, most notably north of the Alps. Why,
then, did other countries not resolve their energy shortages by mining
peat?


For these pre-industrial countries, the value of energy deposits
depended on the cost of transportation rather than the cost of gathering
the fuel itself. There exists no period in history when a global,
continental or even national shortage of wood occured. The problem was
always local, caused by deforestation around urban (and industrial)
centers.

Land-based transport - which amounted to carts on bad roads - was
extremely slow, labour-intensive and expensive, limiting the practical
distance between energy deposits and consumption centres to 20 to 25 km
at most. The only exception to this was transport on water, which, in
pre-industrial times, was powered by wind or by animal or human labour
on towpaths (this was much more efficient than land-based transportation
because of low friction-resistance).

One look at the map of the Low Countries immediately reveals why the
region could afford to transport turf over large distances: it is
criss-crossed by lakes and rivers. From Groningen and Friesland in the
outermost northern part of the present-day Netherlands, one can sail
(almost literally) straight to Amsterdam, Utrecht, Rotterdam, and then
Antwerp, Brussels, Ghent and Bruges in present-day Belgium. No other
region in Europe has such a dense water transport network.

To boot, the region is windy and flat, offering great conditions for
sailing - and deforestation only improved these conditions. Importantly,
the Low Countries are located near the water table - as were their peat
reserves. The digging of navigable canals in the peat areas, and the
linking of these canals to the already existing, extensive network of
natural waterways was relatively easy. Because these natural waterways
gave access to all major cities, the turf could be transported by ship
directly from the peat fields to the doorstep of the consumer. Hardly
any land-based transportation was involved, and this kept costs low.

> Land-based transport was extremely slow, labour-intensive and
> expensive, limiting the practical distance between energy deposits and
> consumption centres to 20 to 25 km at most.

In most other countries, peat reserves were located too far above the
water table, making the construction of canals much more expensive.
Often, cities were too far from potential peat reserves or did not have
access to navigable rivers. This explains why large-scale peat digging
in other European countries and the US only started at the end of the
nineteenth century, when peat could be hauled by steam trains or locally
converted to electricity (which is easier to transport).

Coal and the end of the Dutch Golden Age


Peat was not the only fossil fuel used during the second millenium AD in
Europe. Coal mining started in the thirteenth century in England, Wales
and what is now the French speaking part of Belgium. All over Europe,
coal quickly became a wanted fuel for specific industrial processes,
particularly for blacksmithing and lime manufacturing.

Large-scale coal mining started in the 1400s. In 1430, between 1,600 and
2,000 people worked in the coal industry in Liège (present-day Belgium).
From the 1500s onwards, coal was used on an ever increasing scale in
London, which was then one of the most populated cities in Europe.
There, coal was used industrially, but more often in households for
heating and
cooking.[](http://krisdedecker.typepad.com/.a/6a00e0099229e88833014e8be36e49970d-pi)
At the beginning of the 1600s, when the Dutch Golden Age began, coal
accounted for three quarters of fuel consumption in London, which caused
extensive air pollution. Coal burns much dirtier than wood, which is the
reason why it was previously forbidden in England. However, the acute
shortage of firewood from the 1500s onwards left the English little
other choice than to switch to the abundant fuel. Peat was not an option
for the English for many of the reasons mentioned above.

The crucial role of iron production

Initially, coal offered significant drawbacks compared to peat, which
meant that England's early use of fossil fuels did not provide a
commercial advantage during the seventeenth century. In most production
processes, coal could not be used because it came into direct contact
with the product, which was then ruined by coal's impurities - notably
sulfur. Only in processes where the product could be separated from the
fuel did the substitution of coal for wood cause no problems.

> At the beginning of the 1600s, coal accounted for three quarters of
> fuel consumption in London, which caused extensive air pollution.

Because of its lower sulfur content, peat did not have these
limitations. The Dutch could use it for almost all thermal processes in
their industries. Over time, however, the English managed to adapt their
industrial processes for the use of coal instead of wood and charcoal.
With every step they took, the English slowly caught up to the Dutch. A
turning point came at the dawn of the eighteenth century when the last -
and most important - industrial process was converted to coal: the
production of iron.



This last step, made possible by the introduction of 'cokes' or purified
coal, marked the start of the Industrial Revolution in the Western
world. (It should be noted that the Chinese already developed this
process in the 11th century). From then on, the use of iron as a
construction material was no longer limited by the supply of wood.

Turf, on the other hand, could not deliver the intense heat produced by
coal, and hence was not used in iron production, nor to power steam
engines. (The Dutch never produced iron, they imported it). Moreover,
the caloric value of coal is four times higher than that of turf for a
given volume, making it much easier to transport and store than peat.
The combination of steam power and iron brought the English the rail
system, solving the problem of transporting their fuel supply. The
railway also proved faster and more flexible than the canal system.

Exhaustion of the accessible peat reserves

Around the same time, the most accessible Dutch peat reserves became
exhausted. In addition, there was a growing problem with the silting of
the shallow harbours and waterways, increasing the costs of turf
transport. More and more sandbanks appeared, over which vessels had to
be dragged. A similar thing happened in Bruges a few centuries earlier.
The unique geographical conditions of the Low Countries, which made the
early large-scale use of fossil fuels possible, eventually became a
disadvantage. The depletion of the peat reserves and the difficulties in
turf transport led to rising turf prices, until the point at which
imported coal became cheaper.



To combat this, Dutch industries switched from peat to coal, whenever
they could adapt their production to use the cheaper fuel. English
export of coal to Holland rose from 35,200 tonnes in 1700 to 117,900
tonnes in around 1750. The import of coal put Dutch industries at a
disadvantage, because the English added tax duties. From the 1700s on,
Dutch prosperity began to decline. The import of grain became too
expensive, and de-urbanisation set in as more people returned to
farming. By 1815, the level of urbanization had fallen back from 60 to
38 percent.

Can we power a prosperous society on renewable energy?

Pre-industrial use of coal and peat occured succesively in those parts
of Europe that dominated industrial production from the 1100s to the
start of the Industrial Revolution. The Flemish, the Dutch and the
English, consecutively, became the most prosperous regions in Europe at
the very moments when they used the largest amounts of fossil fuels.In
other words, all economic success stories of the past millenium are
based on an ample supply of fossil fuels - accompanied by serious
ecological damage. Moreover, these regions produced many exports, so
that countries that did not use fossil fuels also benefitted from their
application.

> All economic success stories of the past millenium are based on an
> ample supply of fossil fuels - accompanied by serious ecological
> damage.

All this does not mean that a prosperous society cannot be built on 100
percent renewables. We can now transport biomass over larger distances,
due to good roads and cost-effective transport options. And I am not
referring to motorways and diesel trucks, but to
[trains]({filename}/posts/train-travel.md),
[strip
roads](http://www.notechmagazine.com/2010/04/peak-asphalt-the-return-of-gravel-roads.html),
[trolleytrucks]({filename}/posts/trolleytrucks-trolleybuses-cargotrams.md),
[cargo
bicycles](http://www.notechmagazine.com/2010/06/tandem-cargo-tricycle-1940.html)
and [light electric
vehicles]({filename}/posts/the-status-quo-of-electric-cars-better-batteries-same-range.md)
in flat areas, and [aerial
ropeways]({filename}/posts/aerial-ropeways-automatic-cargo-transport.md)
and [cable
trains]({filename}/posts/water-powered-cable-trains.md)
in mountainous regions.


Furthermore, we now have an additional renewable energy source that
could deliver vast amounts of thermal energy: solar thermal power (see
article "[The bright future of solar powered
factories]({filename}/posts/solar-powered-factories.md)").
The merits of solar thermal heat and concentrated solar power have been
known for centuries, but the materials and industrial processes for
large-scale deployment only became available at the end of the
nineteenth century. The same applies to geothermal power, the potential
use of which was previously limited because of a lack of materials and
technology.

It is obvious that a prosperous future for seven billion people cannot
be based on pre-industrial technology. The key to our success, however,
lies in choosing the best of industrial technology and discarding the
rest.

Kris De Decker (edited by Deva Lee & Shameez Joubert)

![](https://www.paypalobjects.com/en_US/i/scr/pixel.gif){width="1"
height="1"}

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------



Related articles:

-   [Burning the bones of the earth: lime
    kilns]({filename}/posts/lime-kilns.md)
-   [Fruit walls: urban solar farming in the
    1600s]({filename}/posts/fruit-walls-urban-farming.md)
-   [The mechanical transmission of power:
    Stangenkunst]({filename}/posts/mechanical-transmission-of-power-stangenkunst.md)
-   [Wind powered factories: the history (and future) of industrial
    windmills]({filename}/posts/history-of-industrial-windmills.md)
-   [The solar envelope: how to heat and cool cities without fossil
    fuels]({filename}/posts/solar-oriented-cities-1-the-solar-envelope.md)
-   [The bright future of solar powered
    factories]({filename}/posts/solar-powered-factories.md)
-   [Rings of fire: Hoffmann
    kilns]({filename}/posts/hoffmann-kilns-brick-and-tile-production.md)
-   [Restoring the old way of warming: heating people, not
    places]({filename}/posts/heating-people-not-spaces.md)

Sources:

-   "[Energiemarkten en energiehandel in Holland in de late
    middeleeuwen](https://openaccess.leidenuniv.nl/handle/1887/12429)",
    Charles Cornelisse, 2008.
-   "[Peat and the Dutch golden
    age](http://www.peatsociety.org/user_files/files/Zeeuw.pdf)" (.pdf),
    J.W. de Zeeuw, 1978.
-   "[The First Modern Economy: Success, Failure, and Perseverance of
    the Dutch Economy,
    1500-1815](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0521578256/ref=as_li_tf_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=217145&creative=399369&creativeASIN=0521578256)![](http://www.assoc-amazon.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=as2&o=1&a=0521578256&camp=217145&creative=399369){width="1"
    height="1"}", Jan de Vries, 1997.
-   "[The Economy of Europe in an Age of Crisis,
    1600-1750](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0521290503/ref=as_li_tf_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=217145&creative=399377&creativeASIN=0521290503)",
    Jan De Vries, 1976
-   "[Verdwenen venen. Een onderzoek naar de ligging en exploitatie van
    thans verdwenen venen in het gebied tussen Antwerpen, Turnhout,
    Geertruidenberg en Willemstad.
    1250-1750](http://catalogue.nla.gov.au/Record/1322746)", K.A.H.W.
    Leenders, 1989 ([English
    summary](http://users.bart.nl/~leenders/txt/boek1989.html)).
-   "[Peat and Canals](http://www.newyorkcanals.org/_pdfs/Gerding.pdf)"
    (.pdf), Michiel A.W. Gerding
-   "[Meeten, boren en besien: turfwinning in de buitenrijnse ambachten
    van het Hoogheemraadschap van Rijnland
    1680-1800](http://books.google.com/books?id=v5Wq1vmrzRYC&pg=PA55&lpg=PA55&dq=%22Meeten,+boren+en+besien:+turfwinning+in+de+buitenrijnse+ambachten+van+het+Hoogheemraadschap+van+Rijnland+1680-1800&source=bl&ots=UaFLZ7mWUT&sig=tA5Rjg878r2PEx43d1XSVQfOII0&hl=en&ei=9Z6ATpLcM-O50QW7sNjKCQ&sa=X&oi=book_result&ct=result&resnum=3&ved=0CCkQ6AEwAg#v=onepage&q&f=false)",
    A.J.J. van't Riet, 2005
-   "[Delfstoffen, machine- en
    scheepsbouw](http://www.dbnl.org/tekst/lint011gesc04_01/lint011gesc04_01_0001.php#1)",
    in "Geschiedenis van de techniek in Nederland", H.W. Lintsen, 1993.
-   "[Het verloren technisch
    paradijs](http://www.dbnl.org/tekst/lint011gesc06_01/lint011gesc06_01_0004.php)",
    in "Geschiedenis van de techniek in Nederland". H.W. Lintsen, 1993.
-   "[Vervening](http://nl.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vervening)",
    "[Turfsteken](http://nl.wikipedia.org/wiki/Turfsteken)",
    "[Veen](http://nl.wikipedia.org/wiki/Veen_%28grondsoort%29)",
    "[Slagturven](http://nl.wikipedia.org/wiki/Slagturven)",
    "[Baggerbeugel](http://nl.wikipedia.org/wiki/Baggerbeugel)", Dutch
    Wikipedia.
-   "[Canals and energy. The relationship between canals and the
    extraction of peat in the Netherlands
    1500-1950](http://www.drentsplateau.nl/component/docman/doc_download/87-canals-and-energy)"
    (.pdf), Michiel A.W. Gerding, in "Peatlands", February 2010.
-   "[The Rise of Commercial Empires: England and the Netherlands in the
    Age of Mercantilism,
    1650-1770](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0521048648/ref=as_li_tf_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=217145&creative=399373&creativeASIN=0521048648)![](http://www.assoc-amazon.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=as2&o=1&a=0521048648&camp=217145&creative=399373){width="1"
    height="1"} ", David Ormrod, 2003
-   "[A Forest Journey: The Story of Wood and
    Civilization](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0881506761/ref=as_li_tf_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=217145&creative=399377&creativeASIN=0881506761)",
    second edition, John Perlin, 2005
-   "[The Making of Urban Europe,
    1000-1994](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0674543629/ref=as_li_tf_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=217145&creative=399373&creativeASIN=0674543629)![](http://www.assoc-amazon.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=as2&o=1&a=0674543629&camp=217145&creative=399373){width="1"
    height="1"}", Paul M. Hohenberg & Lynn Hollen Lees, 1985
-   "[Urban World History: an Economic and Geographical Perspective.: An
    article from: Canadian Journal of Regional
    Science](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B0046EG5S2/ref=as_li_tf_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=217145&creative=399373&creativeASIN=B0046EG5S2)![](http://www.assoc-amazon.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=as2&o=1&a=B0046EG5S2&camp=217145&creative=399373){width="1"
    height="1"}", Luc-Normand Tellier, 2009
-   "[Peatlands and climate
    change](http://www.peatsociety.org/index.php?id=236)" (pdf),
    International Peat Society, 2008
-   "[The Dutch Republic in the Seventeenth Century: The Golden
    Age](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0521604605/ref=as_li_tf_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=217145&creative=399377&creativeASIN=0521604605)![](http://www.assoc-amazon.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=as2&o=1&a=0521604605&camp=217145&creative=399385){width="1"
    height="1"}", Maarten Roy Prak, Diane Webb, 2005.
-   "[The Rise of the Amsterdam Market And Information Exchange:
    Merchants, Commercial Expansion And Change in the Spatial Economy of
    the Low Countries,
    C.1550-1630](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0754652203/ref=as_li_tf_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=217145&creative=399377&creativeASIN=0754652203)",
    Clé Lesger, 2006.
-   "[Turf fires -burning
    peat](http://www.oldandinteresting.com/peat-fire.aspx)". Old and
    Interesting.
-   "[The Mother of All Trades: The Baltic Grain Trade in Amsterdam from
    the Late 16th to the Early 19th
    Century](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/9004125469/ref=as_li_tf_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=217145&creative=399373&creativeASIN=9004125469)![](http://www.assoc-amazon.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=as2&o=1&a=9004125469&camp=217145&creative=399373){width="1"
    height="1"}", Milja van Tielhof, 2002.
-   "Energy transitions: history, requirements, prospects", Vaclac
    Smil, 2010.

