Title: Power from the Tap: Water Motors
Date: 2013-09-09 02:33
Author: Kris De Decker
Category: Obsolete Technology
Tags: history, pelton turbine, pelton wheel, power transmission, water motors, water power
Slug: power-from-the-tap-water-motors
Status: published



Few people in the western world realize that they have an extra power
source available in their household, workshop or factory: tap water.

Just before the arrival of electricity at the end of the nineteenth
century, water motors were widely used in Europe and America.

These miniature water turbines were connected to the tap and could power
any machine that is now driven by electricity.

Picture: a late nineteenth-century water motor with one side of the
casing removed. Source: [Old Pelton](http://www.oldpelton.net/).


Water has been the main inanimate source of mechanical power from
antiquity right up to the beginning of the twentieth century. Although
most water wheels were located at the banks of the river ([or in the
river
itself]({filename}/posts/boat-mills-bridge-mills-and-hanging-mills.md)),
some were set up at considerable distances from a water source. This was
made possible by the introduction of hydraulic power transmission&mdash;the
process by which water from a stream is led through artificial
watercourses to water wheels built on the land.

To support hydraulic power transmission, man-made channels ("power
canals" or "aqueducts") could be dug into the earth or carved out of the
rocks ("ditches"). They could also be elevated structures whose walls
were raised above the surrounding terrain ("flumes"). Water reservoirs
formed by dams could be integrated into these power transmission
networks, regulating water flow, providing power storage for times when
water was running low, and increasing the "head" or fall of water for a
vertical overshot water wheel. The use of power canals increased
throughout the medieval period and became widespread during the 1500s.

Power from the Tap

In the mid-nineteenth century, many European and American cities
introduced a more sophisticated water distribution system: the public
water supply. Although this introduction was an answer to health
concerns (it had become clear that [reoccurring epidemics were the
consequence of drinking contaminated
water]({filename}/posts/recycling-animal-and-human-dung-is-the-key-to-sustainable-farming.md)),
it became quickly obvious that the potable water sent through the
pipelines of the public water supply could also provide motive power.

Waterwheels were still the most important source of mechanical power in
the early days of public water mains. Most European and American cities
had running water before they had electricity, so there was a market for
a compact power source that could be used in the city, as an alternative
to steam engines (which were too expensive, too dangerous and too
unpractical to operate on a small-scale) or
[hand]({filename}/posts/hand-powered-drilling-tools-and-machines.md)
and [foot powered
machines]({filename}/posts/history-of-pedal-powered-machines.md).





Late nineteenth-century water motors. Pictures:
[Smokstack](http://www.smokstak.com/forum/showthread.php?t=19878)
and[Old Pelton](http://www.oldpelton.net/).

The town mains were no different from the hydraulic power transmission
systems built in earlier times. In public water supply systems,
traditional reliance on geological features as a head for the hydropower
cycle is replaced by the use of a water tower. Water is pumped into an
elevated reservoir, which could be on a hill or on top of a specially
built water tower (a combination of both is also possible).

The height differential between the water level in the reservoir and the
water level in the mains determines the pressure of the water. For every
10.20 cm of elevation, a water column produces 0.145 psi (pounds per
square inch) of pressure. To produce 70 psi of pressure at street level,
a water tower must be 50 m tall.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

It became quickly obvious that the potable water sent through the
pipelines of the public water supply could also provide motive power.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In the town mains, the role of the aqueducts or power canals is taken
over by a much more intricate network of pipelines. This prevents debris
from entering the water and makes uphill water transport easier. Water
piping technology was used in some ancient civilizations, but the
nineteenth-century systems introduced some lasting innovations.

First of all, thanks to the screw type tap (which was patented in 1845),
the water supply could be easily regulated. Second, the water could be
further distributed inside individual buildings, often reaching multiple
rooms at several floors. At any of these spots, all you had to do to
receive motive power from the town mains was to connect a small water
turbine to the tap. This is exactly what happened.

Water Powered Household Devices

In Europe, small motors using the public water supply appeared in the
1840s. In the US, they came into extensive use in the 1870s and 1880s. A
water motor consisted of a small water turbine that was suspended in a
metal casing. The diameter of the turbine runner could be anywhere
between from 20 to 90 cm.





Above: A 1906 advertisement for a typical American water motor. Below: A
hydraulic dynamo. Source: [The Museum of
Retrotechnology](http://www.aqpl43.dsl.pipex.com/MUSEUM/POWER/watermotor/watermotor.htm).

The smallest water motors were used to run sewing machines, jigsaws,
fans, and other similarly mechanized items. The somewhat larger water
motors were recommended for operating coffee grinders, ice cream
freezers, jeweler's and locksmith's lathes, grindstones, church organs,
or drug and paint mills. The largest water motors were used to run
elevators or circular saws. In [water powered washing
machines](http://www.notechmagazine.com/2013/09/water-powered-washing-machine.html),
the water that was needed to wash the clothes was capable of providing
power to the machine simultaneously.

Water motors operated machinery by means of a mechanical power
transmission, similar to old-fashioned wind, water, and [pedal powered
machines from that
era]({filename}/posts/history-of-pedal-powered-machines.md).
The shaft of the water turbine was either equipped with a belt pulley to
which different machines could be attached, or it drove one machine
directly.

At the end of the nineteenth century, water motors were also used to
power electrical devices, especially radios and light bulbs. In this
case, the water motor drove a dynamo that produced electricity on the
spot. Compact units consisting of a small water turbine directly coupled
to a dynamo were commercially available.

Output and Efficiency of a Water Motor

Most water turbines derived pressure by extracting energy from the
impulse of moving water as opposed to generating energy via weight, as
was the case with most water wheels and some other water turbines. A
major innovation was the [Pelton
wheel](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pelton_wheel), which was invented in
1878.

This water turbine consists of a series of cups fastened at equal
intervals around the periphery of a circular disc (the "runner"). The
water enters the casing through an inlet pipe, where it is forced
through a nozzle which reduces its volume and increases its velocity,
after which it is directed to the cups. By changing the nozzle which
influences this fluxuation in pressure, the power obtained from a wheel
could vary. The exhaust water is dropped out of the bottom of the
casing, or led away by an outlet pipe.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The efficiency of a Pelton wheel is not dependent on its size, which
makes it especially attractive for smaller powers.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Pelton turbine is especially well suited for use in combination with
the town mains, due to the fact that it requires a high head and a low
water flow. A Pelton wheel is up to 90% efficient, which is comparable
to the efficiency of a large, modern electric motor. Unlike steam
engines, electric motors, and most other water turbines, which become
less efficient as they become smaller, the efficiency of a Pelton wheel
is not dependent on its size, which makes it especially attractive for
smaller powers.



A water-powered sewing machine. Source: Knight's American Dictionary
(1881).

Water turbines (such as the Pelton wheel) are much more compact than
water wheels, which makes that a small motor can deliver more energy
than one would suspect. The maximum power output of a water motor is
determined by two factors. The first is the prevailing water pressure
and the second is the water flow rate, which is defined by the pipe
diameter and the velocity of the water. The latter factor is rather
fixed for narrow pipes, because at velocities above 8 km/h friction
becomes problematic.

Water pressure in the town mains is typically between 40 and 70 psi
(2.75 to 4.8 bar), and was closer to 70 psi in the nineteenth century.
With a water pressure of 70 psi and a pipe diameter of 1.25 cm (a
typical size for individual branch lines running to the taps), the
maximum power output of a water motor is 0.33 horse power (or 243 watts
of mechanical power). Even after you take into account the efficiency
loss in the motor, this is quite a lot of power: Two to three times as
much as a human operating a pedal powered machine can sustain for an
hour or longer.

Water Use

Water motors supplied a need almost entirely unmatched by other new
motors from that time, and they exploited a source of energy readily
available from centralized systems already built in most urban areas.
However, at least in the United States, their succes was short-lived.
When electric motors and gasoline engines became available, the water
motor lost its attraction. In 1900, the amount of water motors in the US
(an estimated 30,000 motors aggregating 26,000 horse power) was about
one-fifth of the amount of gasoline engines and one-tenth of the amount
of electric motors. \[Source: Hunter 1991\]

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

At the end of the nineteenth century, water motors were also used to
power electrical devices, especially radios and light bulbs

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The main drawback of water motors was their very high use of potable
water. Using a 1.25 cm diameter pipe and a pressure of 70 psi, a water
motor consumed 30 litres of water per minute for a power output of 243
watts. This means that it took 7,440 litres of water to produce 1 kWh of
mechanical energy. To give an idea: People today in the west consume
less than 500 liters of potable water per day, and they consume at least
5 kWh of electric energy per day.





A water powered fan. Found at
[Smokstak](http://www.smokstak.com/forum/showthread.php?t=27871).

If the water pressure dropped below 70 psi, a water motor's power output
decreased with it, while potable water consumption remained the same.
The minimum pressure in the public water supply was (and still is) 20
psi (1.4 bar). Below that value, there is a risk of contamination
because polluted water could enter the mains through leaks in the pipes.

If you were unlucky and you got a water pressure of just 20 psi, motor
output would have been limited to a much less impressive 0.09 hp (67
watt). You could have chosen to restore the power output by increasing
the pipe diameter, but that would have further increased the consumption
of potable water.

There are many reasons why the water pressure in the town mains could be
lower than 70 psi: adoption of a lower water pressure by a company,
leaks in the pipelines, structural location of consumer residences in
relation to the water tower, or use of a water motor on a higher floor.
Water pressure drops by 10 psi per mile of pipeline. Water pressure is
generally higher when it enters the house than when it comes out of the
tap: It will decrease with every bend in the pipelines, and about 5 psi
of pressure is lost each time you go up one floor.

Irregular Water Pressure

Water consumption was further increased by the irregularity of the water
pressure. The use of a water tower is advantageous from an energy
efficiency viewpoint, because you can create water pressure with low
capacity pumps. The pumps only have to meet average demand. A higher
than average demand (for instance, when everybody takes a shower in
morning) can be dealt with by a decreasing water level in the tower. The
reservoir will be filled again when demand is lower than average (mostly
at night).

On the other hand, if you choose to create water pressure by pumping
water *directly* into the mains (a modern approach that is gaining
popularity), you need high capacity pumps that can meet peak demand, and
they will be running inefficiently most of the time.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

While the use of water motors in the US came to an end early in the
twentieth century, the Europeans took hydraulic power transmission one
step further

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Irregular water pressure is not a problem for the distribution of
potable water, but it is very disadvantageous for the use of water
motors. If the water level in the tower decreases, so will the water
pressure in the pipes. To insure enough motor output in the event of
lower water pressures, water motors had to be larger and use larger
diameter pipes than strictly necessary, further increasing the use of
water, and wasting energy. Irregular water pressures lower the energetic
efficiency of a water motor because it achieves its highest efficiency
only when it is optimally adjusted to the prevailing water pressure.



A water-powered egg-beater. Source:
[Smokstak](http://www.smokstak.com/forum/showthread.php?t=114931).

In Search of a Better Solution: the Hydraulic Accumulator

As we have mentioned before, the maximum power output by a water motor
is determined by two factors: Water pressure and water flow. Increasing
the pipe diameter (and thus the flow rate and water use) is only one way
to increase the power capacity of a water motor. The other way is to
increase the water pressure, which yields much more interesting results.
For example, we could produce much more energy with much less water.

With a water pressure of 700 psi (48 bar), which equates to ten times
the pressure in the public mains, a water motor connected to a 1.25 cm
pipe could produce a power output of 3.3 horse power (or 2,500 watts of
mechanical energy). That's ten times more power for the same 30 litres
of water per minute (or ten times less water use for the same power). To
create a water pressure of 700 psi, it would be mandatory to build a
water tower of almost 500 meters tall. Unfortunately, this is not
practical to build.

While the use of water motors in the US came to an end early in the
twentieth century, the Europeans found a solution for the high water use
of water motors and took hydraulic power transmission one step further.
Firstly, they set up special power networks which distributed water
under pressure for motive power purposes only. This eliminated the need
to use potable water. Secondly, Europe switched to a much higher (and
regular) water pressure, which was made possible by [the invention of
the hydraulic
accumulator]({filename}/posts/hydraulic-accumulator-power-water-networks.md).

Read part two: [Power Water
Networks]({filename}/posts/hydraulic-accumulator-power-water-networks.md).

Kris De Decker (edited by Caylen Cole-Hazel)

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Sources:

-   "[A History of Industrial Power in the U.S., 1780-1930: Vol 3: The
    Transmission of
    Power](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0262081989/ref=as_li_qf_sp_asin_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0262081989&linkCode=as2&tag=lowtemagaz-20)![](http://ir-na.amazon-adsystem.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=as2&o=1&a=0262081989){width="1"
    height="1"}", Louis C. Hunter and Lynwood Bryant (1991)
-   "[Water
    Motors](http://www.aqpl43.dsl.pipex.com/MUSEUM/POWER/watermotor/watermotor.htm)",
    The Museum of Retrotechnology
-   "[Old Pelton](http://www.oldpelton.net/)", website.
-   [Efficiency Improvement of Pelton Wheel and Cross Flow Turbines in
    Micro Hydro Power Plants: Case
    Study](http://ijecs.in/ijecsissue/wp-content/uploads/2013/03/416-432ijecs.pdf).
-   [Water Wheel Model: Water
    Motor](http://physics.kenyon.edu/EarlyApparatus/Fluids/Water_Wheel/Water_Wheel.html).



Related Articles:

-   [Back to Basics: Direct Hydro
    Power](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2013/08/direct-hydropower.html#more)
-   [Pedal powered farms and
    factories]({filename}/posts/pedal-powered-farms-and-factories.md):
    the forgotten future of the stationary bicycle
-   [Wind powered
    factories]({filename}/posts/history-of-industrial-windmills.md):
    history (and future) of industrial windmills
-   [Ship
    mills]({filename}/posts/boat-mills-bridge-mills-and-hanging-mills.md):
    water-powered, floating factories
-   [Hand powered drilling tools and
    machines]({filename}/posts/hand-powered-drilling-tools-and-machines.md)

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
