Title: The Mechanical Transmission of Power (2): Jerker Line Systems
Date: 2013-02-02 18:45
Author: Kris De Decker
Category: Obsolete Technology
Tags: historical power transmission, jerker line systems, mechanical power transmission, obsolete technology, power transmission
Slug: the-mechanical-transmission-of-power-jerker-line-systems
Status: published



From the 1860s to 1940s, many oil wells were pumped by a technology that
originates in a sixteenth-century power transmission system used in the
mining industry.

One engine operated up to 45 pumps in different locations, each up to a
mile away. Power was transmitted by means of wooden rods or steel cables
that moved back and forth, snaking through the landscape.

The system was so efficient that an engine used for pumping an oil well
could operate a whole cluster of pump jacks. The technology, which still
operates in a handful of small oil fields, could also work with
renewable energy sources, and shows great potential for efficient
small-scale energy use.

> Jerker line systems can be used to operate water pumps or sawing
> machines, to forge iron, to process food or fibres, or to make paper.

  ---
    
 ---

From the 1500s onwards, engineers developed mechanical power
transmission and distribution systems that became ever more
sophisticated:
[Stangenkunsten]({filename}/posts/mechanical-transmission-of-power-stangenkunst.md).
Networks of pivoted, wooden field-rods conveyed power from waterwheels
in the valleys to mining machinery in the mountains over distances of up
to 4 km, operating pumps and bellows, hoisting ores, and transporting
miners up and down shafts.

Steam engines, which started replacing water wheels from the 1860s
onwards, were not dependent on the proximity of a stream or river, and
could thus be located close to the mine shaft. This eliminated the need
for mechanical power transmission. However, the Stangenkunst did not
disappear. On the contrary, the technology became even more popular
after, rather than before, the invention of the steam engine.

For one, it found a new application in oil production, initially in the
United States but later all over the world. It was in the oil industry
that the Stangenkunst reached the pinnacle of its development, and
became known as the "jerker line system".

The Canadian Jerker Line System

Right from the start of modern oil production in the late 1850s, the
Stangenkunst played an important role. It was first used for pumping oil
in Oil Springs, Ontario, Canada. While the oil here was of very good
quality, production was marginal. The high cost of operating a steam
engine at each was not economically viable. In 1863, only four years
after the industry came into production, a solution was found by John
Henry Fairbank, who set up a system for the transfer of power from a
steam engine to multiple oil pumps.



A Stangenkunst in Oil Springs, Ontario, Canada. Source: [Markus
Wandel](http://wandel.ca/).

The method, which became known as the "Canadian Jerker Line System", was
remarkably similar to the Stangenkunsten. Fairbank used wooden rods,
which swung back and forth from wooden hangers that were suspended from
wooden poles, and connected to wooden pump jacks. He didn't even bother
to apply the more efficient pantograph system developed in the 1590s,
but used the original single-rod system. This made sense: it was cheaper
to build, and friction was less of a problem since the system aimed at
distributing power rather than transferring it long-distance (most oil
pumps were within one mile of the central power source).

Subdividing and Distributing Power

There were some differences between the Fairbank method and the
[pre-industrial
Stangenkunsten]({filename}/posts/mechanical-transmission-of-power-stangenkunst.md).
Two cranks converted the circular motion of the steam engine's wheel to
a reciprocating motion that moved two parallel wooden rods back and
forth, just as in the older systems powered by water wheels. In
Fairbank's model, however, a mechanism was introduced to slow down the
revolution speed of the steam engine. It consisted of a leather belt
placed between the wheel of the steam engine and the cranks. Another
addition was the bull wheel, a cast-iron wheel making back-and-forth
quarter turns. It was housed in a timber frame just outside the engine
shed.


bull wheel in Oil Springs, Ontario. Source: "[Conservation district
study
appendix](http://www.lambtononline.ca/home/residents/planninganddevelopment/Oil%20Heritage%20Conservation%20District%20Plan%20Documents/Forms/AllItems.aspx)",
Oil Heritage Conservation District Plan, The Corporation of the County
of Lambton.

The bull wheel allowed the reciprocating motion of the two cranks to be
subdivided over a greater number of rod lines. In the picture above, for
instance, power is distributed from the steam engine to the bull wheel
via the two wooden rods on the lower left side. It is transferred to a
double field line which runs diagonally from upper left to lower right
(the main line) while a single rod line extends to the centre and back
of the picture. Thus, in this case, five rod lines branch off from the
central power instead of one or two.


field wheel in Oil Springs, Ontario. Source: "[Conservation district
study
appendix](http://www.lambtononline.ca/home/residents/planninganddevelopment/Oil%20Heritage%20Conservation%20District%20Plan%20Documents/Forms/AllItems.aspx)",
Oil Heritage Conservation District Plan, The Corporation of the County
of Lambton.

Additional subdivision of power to other field rods (branch lines) could
happen further along the main line, by means of a "field wheel"&mdash;a
similar cast-iron, oscillating wheel in a timber frame. The field wheel
was also used for diverting a main rod line 90 degrees, as can be seen
in the picture above. Field wheels replaced the "Kunst Kreuzen" or
"Engine Crosses" used in pre-industrial Stangenkunsten.

V-shaped wooden assemblies, lying on their sides, were used to make less
sharp turns. The point of the V was anchored, and acted as the pivot for
the mechanism. When the jerker line pulled on one leg of the V, the
lines comes from the other direction were pulled out, too. A similar
V-rod placed upright was used to change direction in the vertical plane
when the line crossed a hill or valley.

The Pennsylvania Jerker Line System

The Canadian jerker line system spread to other oilfields but was
eventually superseded by a more sophisticated system in which steel
cables and iron bars replaced wooden rods. The metal rods were usually
called "shackle lines". This method was developed in 1879 by
Pennsylvania oilman Edward Yates and became known as the "Pennsylvania
Jerker Line System".



Pennsylvania jerker line system, Flat Rock, Illinois, US. Source: [Old
Iron](http://www.herculesengines.com/FlatRock/).

The famous Pennsylvania oilfields (home to Rockerfeller's Standard Oil
Company) came into production around the same time as the Ontario oil
fields. However, unlike in Canada, steam engines were used to power each
well for the first two decades. Oil wells in the Allegheny Plateau had a
high initial production, which was followed by a rapid drop off. The
incentive for pumping these low production wells after their initial
outflow was small, as new fields were continually being discovered and
drillers would simply sink a new well.

In the late 1870s, following a decline in oil prices and production per
well, economising the oil production process became key to
profitability. This drive for efficiency resulted in the adoption of the
jerker line system, which made using previously-abandoned wells
economically viable again.



Pennsylvania jerker line system, Flat Rock, Illinois, US. Source: [Old
Iron](http://www.herculesengines.com/FlatRock/).

By 1885, the jerker line system was used widely in Pennsylvania (then
the largest oil producer in North America). Thereafter, it spread to
other US oil fields. By the early twentieth century, the system was used
in oil fields around the world. By then, the technology had improved and
numerous oil-well supply companies had developed standardised systems
that could be purchased in part or whole.



Illustration: a schematic of a Pennsylvania jerker line system, showing
both geared power and bandwheel power system. Drawing by Eric S. Elmer.
Source: [Library of
Congress](http://www.loc.gov/pictures/item/pa3551.sheet.00003a/resource/).



While the Canadian jerker line system was reminiscent of the
[Stangenkunsten operating in pre-industrial
times]({filename}/posts/mechanical-transmission-of-power-stangenkunst.md),
the Pennsylvania jerker line system looked radically different. The
prime mover (mostly a gas engine supplied from a nearby well) operated a
"central power" (either geared or bandwheel) which slowed down the
engine speed, converted the engine's rotary motion to reciprocating
motion, and distributed power to all the rod lines.

One Engine Powers 45 pumps

A back-and-forth motion was imparted to the rod lines by an "eccentric",
placed either above or below the geared or bandwheel power, to which 8
to 15 rod lines were hooked that fanned out in all directions. The
eccentric was mounted slightly off-center from the power's central
vertical shaft, with the rod lines attached to the outer slip ring. As
the eccentric rotated within the slip ring, the slip ring oscillated,
pulling the rod lines. For each rotation of the slip ring, the rod lines
completed one full stroke (see the illustration on the right).

Typically, the mechanism produced 12 to 20 oscillations per minute,
pulling the attached shackle lines an equal number of times. Depending
on the number of wells, up to three eccentrics could be mounted on the
central shaft, so that a total of 45 oil wells in different locations
could be pumped. (More commonly, however, 10 to 25 pumps were powered as
they wanted to limit the amount of temporarily unproductive wells in
case of an engine breakdown.)

Implications for Field Layout

These different approaches to subdividing and distributing power led to
distinct field layouts. In the Pennsylvania system, all oil pumps in the
cluster were directly connected to the central power via jerker lines,
which radiated out of the engine shed in all directions:



An axonometric view of the Lockwood Poer (built in 1909), near Warren,
pennsylvania, showing the spatial relationship of machinery to structure
inside a typical octagonal power. Drawing by Eric S. Elmer. Source:
[Library of
Congress](http://www.loc.gov/pictures/item/pa3551.sheet.00003a/resource/).

In the Canadian jerker line system, none of the pump jacks were directly
connected to the central power. Motion was transferred to the bull wheel
and then further subdivided along the main lines using field wheels. As
a result, the Pennsylvania jerker line system generally produced
web-like patterns, while the Canadian jerker line system usually created
linear patterns with dendritic lines.

This can be seen clearly in the James Field in Ontario, which still has
both systems still operating. The spider-like systems use metal rods,
while the linear systems use wooden rods.


map of the James field with its well numbers, central powers and
additional features. The spider-like systems use metal rods, while the
linear systems use wooden rods. Source: "[Conservation district study
appendix](http://www.lambtononline.ca/home/residents/planninganddevelopment/Oil%20Heritage%20Conservation%20District%20Plan%20Documents/Forms/AllItems.aspx)",
Oil Heritage Conservation District Plan, The Corporation of the County
of Lambton.

A Balanced system

The web-like layout of the Pennsylvania system offered an important
advantage. Because a Stangenkunst was always a combination of horizontal
and vertical power transmission, gravity delivered part of the power. A
water wheel or steam engine had to deliver all the power needed to make
the horizontal stroke that pulled the vertical mechanism upwards, but
gravity aided the return stroke. In the case of oil pumping, the weight
of the grasshopper pump made the return stroke, saving energy.



Pennsylvania jerker line system, Flat Rock, Illinois, US. Source: [Old
Iron](http://www.herculesengines.com/FlatRock/).

This effect was doubled when each well was matched with one in the
opposite direction. When the sucker rods in one well raised (the
upstroke), those in the opposite well lowered under their own weight
(the downstroke), helping raise the rods in the well undergoing the
upstroke. In other words, the pumps were powering each other with their
own weight. This minimized the load on the engine: the only power
required was for overcoming inertia and friction, plus the weight of the
oil lifted at each stroke.



Pennsylvania jerker line system, Flat Rock, Illinois, US. Source: [Old
Iron](http://www.herculesengines.com/FlatRock/).

The web-like layout of the Pennsylvania system made balancing loads much
easier. At all times, half the dead load of rods and mechanisms in the
field was being lifted while the other half descended. The steel rods
attached to the eccentric could be hooked to, or unhooked from, shackle
lines that were connected to the oil pumps. If one well was
disconnected, the well in the opposite direction was removed to maintain
balance. If this was not possible, the eccentric rod of the disconnected
well was hooked to a counterbalance. Since all pumps were directly
connected to the central power, one worker could balance the load of all
the wells.



This made it possible for a cluster of about 15 to 30 oil wells to be
pumped with almost the same engine capacity required to pump one well.
In *Surface Machinery and Methods for Oil-Well Pumping* (1925), H.C.
George writes:

*"In the early days of the oil industry, all nonflowing wells were
pumped individually "on the beam" by steam engines. This system wasted
both labor and power, as each well required a man and a steam power
plant. At present a group of 15 to 30 similar wells is pumped with a
central "power" or "jack" plant with practically the same labor and the
same energy capacity as was then used at each well."*

*"Many oil wells if pumped individually would show a loss, but operated
as members of a group they show a profit. The older fields of
Pennsylvania, Ohio, West Virginia, and Illinois exemplify efficiency in
group operation. In Pennsylvania the 59,000 operating oil wells show an
average of less than a quarter of a barrel production per well per day,
yet are being operated at a profit by the group method."*

*"Wells of like characteristics, such as pumping time, length of stroke,
and size of tubing should be balanced for best results. Some oil
companies pump wells of like characteristics at the same time, then take
those wells off the power and put on other wells of like
characteristics. This practice is common in some of the eastern oil
fields, where many wells do not pump more than a few hours per week, and
where powers handle 15 to 30 wells, each pumped only several hours at a
time."*

Shacklework

The use of steel cables instead of wooden rods also made it easier to
navigate difficult terrain. The Pennsylvania jerker line system made use
of a variety of devices to support the lines and change their direction
-- these were generally called "shacklework". The steel cables were hung
from tripods or supported by "friction posts", which were fixed in the
ground, or "rocking posts", which were mounted on a pivoting base to
allow a rocking motion. "Hold-ups" and "hold-downs" guided the lines up
or down, while "butterflies" and "ring swings" allowed them to change
direction in order to carry the lines around obstacles.



Pennsylvania jerker line system, Flat Rock, Illinois, US. Source: [Old
Iron](http://www.herculesengines.com/FlatRock/).

A "butterfly" was a triangular wooden or metal frame, which allowed up
to 90 degree turns and was reminiscent of the V-rods used in the
Canadian and pre-industrial system. A "ring swing" was used for lesser
changes in direction and was even simpler. It consisted of three rings:
one large ring, attached to a another suitable mounting spot, and two
smaller rings attached to the large ring and the shackle line. Pendulums
and rockers were sometimes used to make the length of the stroke at the
well differ from that imparted to the jerker line at the central power.

Often, the shacklework was made from recycled parts, such as discarded
rods or pipes. In 1925, H.C. George wrote that "the power or jack plant,
and the machinery, shackle line, and jack are all usually standard and
purchased from oil-well supply companies, but the shackle line
structures are usually designed and built by the operating oil company.
This results in a multiplicity of designs and a variety of material."







In some American towns, shacklework from neighbouring oil fields rocked
back and forth over streets and alleys.

Jerker Line Systems Still in Operation

The Pennsylvania jerker line system became the dominant technology used
to pump secondary oil wells up till the 1940s, pumping wells up to 3,500
feet deep, and remained in use until the 1960s and 70s. A few
installations are stilll running today, or operated until recently. Some
of the pictures above and below (there are [many more if you follow this
link](http://www.herculesengines.com/FlatRock/)), show the last two oil
leases in Flat Rock, Illinois, which used a central power source and rod
lines of the Pennsylvania type.



Pennsylvania jerker line system, Flat Rock, Illinois, US. Source: [Old
Iron](http://www.herculesengines.com/FlatRock/).

Each is run with a 35 horse power oil-engine and pumps 10 or 11 wells.
The rods rest on wood stakes 15 to 20 feet apart and the power moves the
rods about 40 cm back and forth. In some places, the rods are rigged to
cross a creek or make a turn and head in a different direction. The
systems were photographed in 2003, when they were still operational.

Most remarkable, however, are the central power systems in Oil Springs,
Ontario, which have been in operation for 150 years now. Some of these
oil fields still make use of the Canadian jerker line system, which was
the original technology used to pump oil in the mid-nineteenth century
when the fields came into production. Most of the lines on the Fairbank
field, and some of the lines on the James field, use wooden rods that
operate wooden pump jacks, while some lines on the James field, and all
lines on the neighbouring fields, use the original Pennsylvania jerker
line system.



Canadian jerker line system, Ontario. Source: [Markus
Wandel](http://wandel.ca/).

While there are obviously sentimental reasons for using nineteenth and
early twentieth century technology&mdash;the owner of the fields is a
great-grandson of John Henry Fairbank, designer of the Canadian jerker
line system&mdash;the site is not a museum, but a working field that is
economically viable. Instead of holding on to the past and trying to
recreate a historic oil field, the technology has been continuously
improved to maintain its profitability.

More Efficient

One major change in the technology is that steam engines have been
replaced by small electric motors, which are cheaper, more efficient and
easier to maintain. Most are equipped with reduction gearing, which has
made the bulky powerhouse mechanism redundant. Individually-powered pump
jacks have replaced the central power system in locations where running
a jerker line has failed to be cost-effective, but where the central
power system is still in use, it is so because it remains the most
efficient and economical.



Stangenkunst in Ontario, Canada. Source: [Markus
Wandel](http://wandel.ca/).

Even the remaining wooden field rods have been improved: metal hangers
that once supported the wooden jerker lines have been replaced with
nylon rope for ease of maintenance. The wood for jerker lines and pump
jacks is not original, of course, since it is exposed to the elements:
the rebuilding of wood equipment has been an on-going historic process.



Canadian jerker line system, Ontario. Source: [Markus
Wandel](http://wandel.ca/).

Oil extraction is usually thought to be large in scale and finite in its
lifecycle. However, in Oil Springs, it has been conducted on a
continuous, small-scale basis since the late 1850s, while all other oil
fields from those times have long been pumped dry using much more
powerful technology. One cannot help but wonder how the world would have
looked like if all oilmen had stuck with nineteenth century technology.

Future Applications

The jerker line system has value, and could be very helpful for those
looking for ways to live comfortably life without excessive energy use.
The system in the picture below&mdash;which still operates today in Oil
Springs&mdash;is one that any maker could bolt together quickly in no time.
With this set-up, one small electric motor could operate four machines
in different locations.



Field motor on steel frame with steel jerker rods on the James Field.
Source: "[Conservation district study
appendix](http://www.lambtononline.ca/home/residents/planninganddevelopment/Oil%20Heritage%20Conservation%20District%20Plan%20Documents/Forms/AllItems.aspx)",
Oil Heritage Conservation District Plan, The Corporation of the County
of Lambton.

Why do this instead of powering each device individually? One: you save
three electric motors. Two: there is no need to provide batteries or
electric outlets at any of the locations. Three: you can balance the
system so that one device helps power the other, saving a considerable
amount of energy. The electric motor shown above can also be replaced by
[a
windmill]({filename}/posts/history-of-industrial-windmills.md),
[a water
wheel]({filename}/posts/boat-mills-bridge-mills-and-hanging-mills.md),
[a solar thermal
plant]({filename}/posts/solar-powered-factories.md),
or [a stationary
bicycle]({filename}/posts/pedal-powered-farms-and-factories.md).
In these cases, you can distribute mechanical energy without conversion
losses.

Although a Stangenkunst or jerker line system can only transfer
mechanical energy via reciprocating motion, it has seen a remarkable
variety of applications [throughout its 450 years of
operation]({filename}/posts/mechanical-transmission-of-power-stangenkunst.md):
pumping (either oil or water), ventilation (operating bellows),
processing ores (operating trip-hammers), and even transporting people
and goods up and down shafts (operating man engines and bucket hoists).
Reciprocating motion could also be used to operate sawing machines or,
using trip-hammers, to forge iron, process food or fibres, or make
paper.

Kris De Decker (edited by [Deva Lee](http://theculturemuncher.com/))

Sources:

-   "[Surface Machinery and Methods for Oil-Well
    Pumping](http://digital.library.unt.edu/ark:/67531/metadc12407/m1/1/)",
    H.C. George, Bulletin 224, Bureau of Mines, Department of
    Interior, 1925.

<!-- -->

-   "[Oil Heritage Conservation District Plan
    Documents](http://www.lambtononline.ca/home/residents/planninganddevelopment/Oil%20Heritage%20Conservation%20District%20Plan%20Documents/Forms/AllItems.aspx)",
    The Corporation of the County of Lambton, 2010.

<!-- -->

-   "[Historic American Engineering Record; Addendum to Allegheny
    National Forest Oil
    Heritage](http://lcweb2.loc.gov/pnp/habshaer/pa/pa3500/pa3551/data/pa3551data.pdf)"
    (PDF), HAER No. PA-436, Michael W. Caplinger, 1997

<!-- -->

-   "Allegheny Oil Powers: Documenting Endangered Cultural Resources in
    Allegheny National Forest", Christopher Marston, 2000

<!-- -->

-   "Technology on the Frontier - Mining in Old Ontario", Dianne Newell,
    1986

<!-- -->

-   "Petroleum Mining and Oil-Field Development&mdash;a Guide to the
    Exploration of Petroleum Lands, and a Study of the Engineering
    Problems connected with the Winning of Petroleum.", A. Beeby
    Thompson, 1910.

<!-- -->

-   "[Oil History in Ontario](http://wandel.ca/oil/)", Markus Wandel

<!-- -->

-   "Early development of oil technology", Wanda Pratt and Phil
    Morningstar, 1987

Related articles:

-   [The mechanical transmission of power (1):
    Stangenkunst]({filename}/posts/mechanical-transmission-of-power-stangenkunst.md)

<!-- -->

-   [The mechanical transmission of power (3): Endless rope
    drives]({filename}/posts/the-mechanical-transmission-of-power-3-wire-ropes.md)

<!-- -->

-   [Wind-powered factories: the history (and future) of industrial
    windmills]({filename}/posts/history-of-industrial-windmills.md)

<!-- -->

-   [The sky is the limit: human powered cranes and lifting
    devices]({filename}/posts/history-of-human-powered-cranes.md)

<!-- -->

-   [Medieval smokestacks: fossil fuels in pre-industrial
    times]({filename}/posts/peat-and-coal-fossil-fuels-in-pre-industrial-times.md)

<!-- -->

-   [Boat mills: water-powered, floating
    factories]({filename}/posts/boat-mills-bridge-mills-and-hanging-mills.md)

<!-- -->

-   [Email in the 18th century: the optical
    telegraph]({filename}/posts/email-in-the-18.md)

<!-- -->

-   [Automata: engineering for a post-oil
    world?]({filename}/posts/automata-engineering-for-a-post-oil-world.md)

<!-- -->

-   [Pedal powered farms and workshops: the forgotten future of the
    stationary
    bicycle]({filename}/posts/pedal-powered-farms-and-factories.md)



  

  

  

