Title: The Mechanical Transmission of Power (3): Endless Rope Drives
Date: 2013-03-02 18:12
Author: Kris De Decker
Category: Obsolete Technology
Tags: mechanical power transmission, power transmission, rope drives
Slug: the-mechanical-transmission-of-power-3-wire-ropes
Status: published



You don't need electricity to send or receive power quickly. In the
second half of the nineteenth century, we commonly used fast-moving
ropes. These wire rope transmissions were more efficient than
electricity for distances up to 5 kilometres. Even today, a
nineteenth-century rope drive would be more efficient than electricity
over relatively short distances. If we used modern materials for making
ropes and pulleys, we could further improve this forgotten method.

Picture: wire rope transmission in Schaffhausen, Switzerland, 1886.
Source: [Schaffhausen Foto
Archiv](http://www.schaffhausen-foto-archiv.ch/moserdamm.html).


The rope drive is the culmination of a long history of mechanical power
transmission. In the 1500s, mining engineers designed
"[Stangenkunsten]({filename}/posts/mechanical-transmission-of-power-stangenkunst.md)":
a method to transmit power from distant water wheels to machinery at the
mineshaft, using reciprocating wooden rods. This early predecessor of
electricity was improved in the 1860s oil industry's "[Jerker line
systems]({filename}/posts/the-mechanical-transmission-of-power-jerker-line-systems.md)",
which used steel cables instead of wooden rods.

The need for long-distance power transmission appeared first in the
mining industry because mines could not be relocated to a nearby water
power source. In the nineteenth century, the need for power transmission
spread to other industries because the demand for power had grown
considerably with the arrival of the Industrial Revolution, and most
available water power resources had already been put to use --
especially in Europe. A new form of power transmission was needed to
make previously inaccessible sources of water power available. For
instance, many powerful water sources in mountainous areas were idle
because these sites were unsuitable for building factories. The
development of steam engines also called for power distribution and
transmission, especially in Great Britain and in the US, because smaller
engines were uneconomical to operate.

The pioneering power-transmission technology developed by the mining
industry was not suited for most of these new demands. A Stangenkunst or
jerker line system transmitted power using a reciprocating motion, while
most industries required circular motion to drive machinery. Although
these systems could be adapted to convert reciprocating motion into
circular motion, this was possible only at low speeds and the expense of
considerable energy loss \[1\]. Apart from this, the power that could be
transmitted by a mere dead pull was limited. Enormous wooden rods or
steel cables would have been needed to transmit the amount of power that
could be harvested from mountain streams and waterfalls \[2\].

The Millwork

Around 1850, the only available technology for the transmission of fast,
circular motion was the so-called "millwork". This combination of
shafts, gears, belts and pulleys was aimed at the distribution (rather
than long-distance transmission) of mechanical energy. It transferred
power from a prime mover (a water turbine or a steam engine) to
individual machines.



A factory interior in Germany. Source: [Singen
Industry](http://www.singen-hegau-archiv.ch/singen-industrie.html).

While the nineteenth-century millwork was considerably more efficient
than the [large wooden gears and
shafts]({filename}/posts/history-of-industrial-windmills.md)
in the pre-industrial wind- and watermills from which it evolved, it was
not suited for longer distances. One engineer calculated that 75% of the
power transmitted by a lineshaft would be absorbed by friction of the
bearings at a distance of between 95 to 600 m \[3\]. Moreover, millwork
required protection from the weather and so could not be operated
outdoors.



A factory interior in Germany. Source: [Singen
Industry](http://www.singen-hegau-archiv.ch/singen-industrie.html).

Even for short distances, nineteenth century millwork was rather
inefficient. A major investigation in the early 1880s covering 55
industrial establishments, chiefly textile mills, revealed that the
combined power losses in engines and millwork were on average 25%. For
machine shops, the energy loss was on average 40 to 50% \[4\]. Line
shafts were also hungry for space, costly to install, troublesome to
maintain and adjust, hazardous in use, and inflexible in arrangement.

Wire Rope Power Transmission

Late nineteenth-century industry was in need of a more efficient and
versatile method of power transmission for both short and long
distances. Several alternatives were in the running: power could be
transmitted by electricity, compressed air, hydraulics, steam, millwork,
or ropes. While electricity eventually won the battle, a few others
deserve more attention \[5\].

Rope transmission, the subject of this article, stands apart from all
other power transmission technologies because it doesn't involve any
conversion of energy. An endless rope drive transmits mechanical energy
directly from a power source to machinery. As we will see, this makes
rope transmission more efficient than any other alternative up to a
distance of a few kilometres.



Contrary to electricity and compressed air, the transmission of power by
rope was not a radical departure from traditional methods. Conceptually,
wire rope transmission simply extended the range of millwork by
improving its efficiency and flexibility, and by making it
weather-proof. Rope transmission started in the 1840s as an element of
millwork, using fast-spinning fibrous ropes as an alternative to belts
transmitting power from the prime mover to the line shafts \[6\]. When
fibrous ropes were replaced by metallic ropes (or "wire ropes"), a
long-distance power transmission was born.

Wire Rope

Interestingly, the wire rope itself can be traced back to the same
region that invented the Stangenkunst in the 1500s: the Upper Harz
mining region in Germany. In the 1830s, mining engineer Wilhelm Albert
twisted together several strands of metal wire around a hempen core,
resulting in a superior hoisting cable for use in vertical shafts.
Compared to [a fibrous
rope]({filename}/posts/lost-knowledge-ropes-and-knots.md),
a wire rope is much stronger, despite being the same weight and
diameter. Unlike fibrous rope, it keeps its strength when it is wet, and
its length remains constant under all weather conditions.

> Contrary to electricity and compressed air, the transmission of power
> by rope was not a radical departure from traditional methods

Metallic ropes were used throughout the global mining industry during
the 1800s, replacing metal chains and fibrous cables for hoisting up
ores and transporting miners up and down shafts. The wire rope also led
to important uses outside the industry. It enabled the invention of the
suspension bridge and came in handy as a means to carry other static
loads such as smokestacks and masts. But its main applications involved
moving passengers and goods, both vertically and horizontally. The wire
rope gave birth to the elevator and made [cranes and hoisting
machines]({filename}/posts/history-of-human-powered-cranes.md)
much more powerful. It introduced new transportation options on land (as
in [cable
trains]({filename}/posts/water-powered-cable-trains.md)),
on water (as in [rope-powered canal
boats]({filename}/posts/trolley-canal-boats.md)),
and in the air (as in [aerial
ropeways]({filename}/posts/aerial-ropeways-automatic-cargo-transport.md)).

How did it Work?

Few know that wire rope was also used to transmit energy across land. A
wire rope power transmission, or "telodynamic transmission" as it was
initially called, was basically an aerial ropeway running without
vehicles, at higher speeds. Both aerial ropeways and wire rope drives
were sold by the same manufacturers. Wire rope transmissions used thin
wire ropes (up to 2.5 cm in diameter) and large, cast-iron pulleys (up
to 5 m in diameter), mounted on wooden, iron or masonry towers placed at
maximum intervals of 90 to 150 m. The bottom of the pulley grooves was
made of strips of leather to limit the wear of the rope.



Detail of the wire rope transmission in
[Neuthal](http://www.industrieensemble.ch/), the only remaining wire
rope transmission line in Europe. Photo credit: [Peter
Christener](http://www.egghof.com/weblog/seiltransmission.html).

The fundamentals of the method were concisely described by Albert Stahl
in his 1889 treatise *Transmission of Power by Wire Ropes*:

"The construction of the apparatus is very simple. A tolerably large
iron wheel, having a V-shaped groove in its rim, is connected with the
motor, and driven with a perimetral velocity of usually from 50 to 100
feet \[per second\]. Round this wheel is passed a thin wire rope, which
is led away to almost any reasonable distance (the limit being
measurable by miles), where it passes over a similar wheel, and then
returns as an endless band to the wheel whence it started."

For longer wire rope transmissions, two configurations were possible.
Either one, long continuous rope was used, supported at intervals by
carrying sheaves, similar to those of an aerial ropeway. Usually,
though, a wire rope power transmission used shorter ropes that extended
between stations, instead of running the whole length of the
transmission. Each tower then served as the driver for another by means
of a double pulley arrangement, or a double grooved wheel.



When using carrying sheaves to bridge larger spans, it was often
sufficient to support only the slack side of the rope. The illustration
above shows the different arrangements used for wire rope transmissions.
When the rope drive had to change direction, or when the power had to be
distributed to a number of consumers, this could be done by using either
horizontal sheaves, or more frequently, bevel gearing/wheels.

Diffusion of the Technology

The use of wire rope for power transmission over long distances was
invented by the Hirn brothers in 1850, while they were setting up a
weaving factory in an abandoned textile works near Logelbach,
Switzerland. The buildings were scattered over considerable distances
and setting up multiple steam engines would have been too expensive.
Following some initial problems (finding a suited material as a seating
for the ropes proved to be one of the biggest) the Hirn Brothers set up
power transmission lines between the buildings. The longest line reached
235 m, transmitting 50 horse power (hp).



After the initial success of the Hirn installation, the technology
spread rapidly throughout the Alps, and beyond. W.C. Unwin gives a
detailed overview of the initial diffusion of telodynamic transmissions
in his 1894 book *On the Development and Transmission of Power from
Central Stations*:

"Soon after the erection of the transmissions at Logelbach M. Henri
Schlumberger transmitted the power of a turbine 86 yards to work
agricultural machinery. In 1857, at Copenhagen, Captain Jagd transmitted
45 hp to saw-mills at a distance of more than 1,000 yards. In 1858, at
Cornimont, in the Vosges, 50 hp was transmitted 1,251 yards. In 1859, at
Oberursel, 100 hp was transmitted 1,076 yards; and at Emmendingen 60 hp
was transmitted 1,372 yards. In 1862 Hirn stated that about 400
applications of the telodynamic system had been constructed by Messrs.
Stein & Co., of Mulhouse, carrying an aggregate of 4,200 hp over
distances amounting altogether to 80,000 yards."

> Telodynamic transmission was adopted in three of the earliest central
> power stations in Europe

These installations had an average capacity of about 10 hp and a
transmission distance of about 180 m. By 1869, two years after Hirn's
invention received an award at the Universal Exposition in Paris, about
2000 permanent installations had been constructed on the European
Continent. Most were relatively small ropeways, but some were fairly
large. The Hirn system was adopted in three of the earliest central
power stations in Europe: Schaffhausen (1864) and Fribourg (1870) in
Switzerland, and Bellegarde (1872) in France. These installations
transmitted between 560 and 3150 hp by wire ropes, over distances up to
966 m.

The Schaffhausen Transmission

The Schaffhausen transmission is regarded as the most complex wire rope
transmission ever built, using 1027 m of ropes, aggregating more than
600 hp. After a period of trade depression there was a revival of
industry at Schaffhausen. The required energy was found in the immense
volume of water passing down the rapids of the Rhine in front of the
town. Since the steep rocky banks forbade the erection of any factories
in the immediate neighbourhood, the power was transferred diagonally
across the stream to the town, about a mile lower down, and there
distributed, with certain rocks in the water being used to set up the
intermediate stations.



The Schaffhausen wire rope transmission in 1896. Source: [Schaffhausen
Foto Archiv](http://www.schaffhausen-foto-archiv.ch/moserdamm.html).

It is interesting to republish Unwin's full description of the
Schaffhausen installation, because "it is essential to learn how far
wire-rope transmission can be adapted to complex situations where many
consumers require power":

"A weir was constructed during favourable seasons in 1864-66, across the
rocky bed of the river, which is about 500 feet wide. By placing the
turbine-house in the river-bed near the weir and constructing a tunnel
tailrace 620 feet in length, a fall was obtained which varies from 15.6
to 13.7 feet. The turbine house contains three turbines with vertical
shafts of 200, 260, and 300 hp, or 760 hp altogether. They gear with a
common horizontal shaft by means of bevil gears. About 150 hp is
transmitted from one of the turbines to a factory on the hill above the
turbine-house, by a steel shaft 550 feet in length. From the same shaft
also about 22 hp is transmitted, by a small cable passing down the left
bank of the river and then crossing it, to a pulp factory on the right
bank."

"This leaves a maximum of about 570 hp to be dealt with by the main
cable transmission, which crosses the river directly from the
turbine-house, and then passes along the right bank to the factories.
The turbines are connected to two principal rope pulleys of 14.75 feet
in diameter. From these pulleys two cables cross the river in a single
span of 385 feet to a pulley station in the river at the left bank,
where the direction of the transmission is changed by bevil gearing, and
thence the transmission passes up the left bank of the river. The gross
power in the horizontal driving shaft in the turbine-house is about 350
hp or, allowing for friction, say 500 effective hp to be transmitted to
the factories, or 250 hp for each rope. Either rope is capable of
transmitting at any rate a large fraction of the whole power
temporarily, if the other rope is broken. The power is delivered by the
ropes at the change station on the left bank. At that station about 22
hp is taken off by prolonging the second shaft of the bevil gearing and
a subsidiary rope transmission."

"The remaining 478 hp is transmitted along the left bank to the first
intermediate pulley station at a distance of 370 feet by a pair of
cables. Thence to the second intermediate station, distant 345 feet, by
another pair of cables. At 455 feet further is a second change station,
at which the direction is again changed by gearing. Thence the ropes
pass to two other intermediate stations. From the second intermediate
station an underground shaft carries about 27 hp to ten small workshops,
and from the second change station, and the third and fourth
intermediate stations, cables are carried back across the river to
factories on the right bank. From the first shaft on the second change
station about 110 hp are distributed, partial by a special rope gear,
partly by vertical and underground shafting, to four factories, one of
which is the large Mosersche Gebaude; and from the second shaft of this
station a steel shaft transmits 200 hp to Scholler's wool factory."

The Schaffhausen installation was a greatly successful undertaking. The
number of renters of power grew from 13 in 1867 to 23 in 1887, while the
average total horse power supplied grew from 121 to 641. The total
income from rental of power rose tenfold.

Other Examples

The wire rope transmission at Fribourg, where the ravine is not suitable
for factories, was no less impressive. Here, a wire rope transmitted 300
hp to an industrial site 90 m above the river. Power was distributed via
wire ropes to a sawmill, a foundry, a chemical factory, a rope tramway
for carrying timber, and a railway carriage works. The total distance of
the transmission amounted to more than 1500 m. Part of the line passed
through a specially designed tunnel.



At Bellegarde, which lies about 25 km from Geneva, 3150 hp was
transmitted in different directions via wire ropes from the river Rhône
to the plain above, where it was used to operate a phosphate works, a
wood pulp factory, a paper mill, a copper refinery and a pumping
station. The transmission lines reached a total length of more than 900
m.

> Most wire rope transmissions were built in France, Switzerland and
> Germany, but the technology was used all over the world

Most wire rope transmissions were built in France, Switzerland and
Germany, but the technology was used all over the world. Following a
serious explosion, an installation was put up at a gunpowder factory at
Ochta near St. Petersburg, Russia, in 1867. A total of 274 hp was
transmitted by more than 3000 m of wire rope to 34 widely scattered
workshops and laboratories. The wire rope transmission was adopted to
ensure that the buildings should be at a safe distance from each other
were another explosion to occur.

At Gokak, India, a large telodynamic transmission was set to work in
1887. A total of 750 hp was transmitted to a large cotton mill via three
wire ropes (illustration below).



Numerous wire rope installations were built in the United States&mdash;a
total of 400 telodynamic systems were reported in 1874. Most prominent
were those at Lockport (New York), Lawrence (Kansas), and near Great
Falls (Montana) on the upper Missouri River \[7\]. However, none of them
approached the size of the Schaffhausen plant in Switzerland. The
technology seems not to have attained the popularity and importance that
it did in the regions of its principal continental use, writes Louis
Hunter, who adds that "this was no doubt owing to the greater abundance
of water powers in the US in a wide range of capacities, and to the
abundance of coal and the rapidly increasing acceptance of steam power
from the 1850s."

Efficiency

It may seem that wire rope power transmissions running over hundreds and
sometimes thousands of metres, could not be very efficient. However, a
wire rope transmission was considerably more efficient (and cheaper)
than electricity up to distances of about 5 km (3 miles). As with
[jerker line
systems]({filename}/posts/the-mechanical-transmission-of-power-jerker-line-systems.md),
the efficiency advantage was due to the fact that in a telodynamic
transmission mechanical energy can be transmitted without conversion
losses. This was emphasised by W.C. Unwin in 1894:

"The telodynamic system has the peculiar advantage that it transmits the
mechanical energy developed by the prime mover directly, without any
intermediate transformation. In electrical distribution a double
transformation is necessary: a transformation into electrical energy by
a dynamo, and retransformation back into mechanical energy by an
electric motor. This double transformation involves waste of power and
increase of capital expended."

On the other hand, a wire rope transmission introduces friction losses.
The principal source of waste in rope transmission is the friction in
the journals of the wheel shafts. The friction losses become larger as
the distance increases, because more pulley stations have to be
introduced, while the conversion losses of electric transmission are
independent of distance. (There were transportation losses for
electricity, too, but these were comparatively small). Beyond a certain
distance, a wire rope transmission loses its advantage over electricity.



Pulley wheel of the wire rope transmission in Neuthal, Switzerland.
[Picture
credit](http://www.industrieensemble.ch/wasser.wasserkraft.html#apDiv9).

The efficiency of telodynamic transmission was carefully examined by
Ziegler, one of the better known manufacturers. He made experiments at
Oberursel, where 104 hp was transmitted over a distance of 963 m, in
seven spans of about 122 m each. Ziegler's measurements showed that
total loss of work over eight stations was 13.5 hp, which comes down to
an efficiency of about 87%. The loss of energy was about 1.7 hp per
pulley station.

> A wire rope transmission was considerably more efficient than
> electricity up to distances of about 5 km (3 miles)

From this he calculated that the efficiency of a wire rope transmission
was 97% for a single span (two pulley stations), 95% for two spans
(three pulley stations), 93% for three spans (four pulley stations), and
90% for five spans (six pulley stations). For nine spans (ten pulley
stations), efficiency went down to 85%.



Another investigation, published in 1886, showed that wire rope had an
efficiency that was largely superior for distances up to 900 m (3,000
feet), compared to the main competing technologies (electric, hydraulic
and pneumatic transmission). Telodynamic transmission retained this
advantage up to a distance of about 4,600 m (15,000 feet), beyond which
it was defeated by electricity. In other words, wire rope lost its
advantage over electricity when more than 35 pulley stations were
involved. Were a wire rope transmission to be used over a distance of 18
km (60,000 feet), efficiency would go down to 13%. \[8\]

Note that the results are for a full load&mdash;both electrical and wire
rope transmission would have been much less efficient at partial loads.
Also note that the results for wire rope transmission involve power
transmission in a straight line&mdash;every angle station would introduce
additional losses. With regards to cost, Hunter notes that copper wire
was 1.4 times more expensive than wire rope, and all nineteenth-century
authors state that wire rope transmission was cheaper in construction
and use than electricity, even though the ropes had to be replaced every
two to five years.

How would a Present-day Wire Rope Transmission Compare to Electricity?

The advantages of rope transmission calculated in 1860 and 1886 still
hold today. The only difference would be that a comparison of a rope
drive and an electrical transmission would now show much better
efficiencies for electricity at distances of 10 or 20 km (30,000 or
60,000 feet). In the 1880s, electricity was still transmitted by direct
current (DC), which is much less efficient at longer distances than the
alternate current (AC) that we use today. With AC, the losses are only
3% over a distance of 1,000 km \[9\].



A wire rope power transmission leaves a water power plant, heading for a
paper factory in Heilbronn, Germany. The line, 90 m long, was
constructed in 1888. [Photo
credit](http://www.stadtarchiv-heilbronn.de/stadtgeschichte/unterricht/bausteine/muehlen/arbeitsvorschlaege/grundlagen/).

However, the efficiency of electricity would still be lower than that of
a wire rope transmission over a relatively short distance, because of
the double energy conversion that is required to move mechanical energy
using electricity. The combined energy losses in a modern electric motor
and generator are about 15%, which makes the double energy conversion
85% efficient \[10\]. This is better than the 69% efficiency in the 1889
table shown above, but still inferior to the efficiency of a nineteenth
century wire rope transmission up to a distance of at least 1 km (3,000
feet).

> A wire rope transmission from 1860 is still more efficient than a
> moden electric transmission up to a distance of at least 1 km

Of course, it is not fair to compare a nineteenth-century wire rope
transmission with a 21st-century electric transmission. With today's
knowledge and materials, a rope transmission could be improved in two
ways: by using stronger and/or lighter ropes, and by running them at
higher speeds. The result would be that more power can be transmitted
over longer distances with less friction loss. In 1894, Unwin noted
that:

"The amount of work transmitted by a cable is proportional to the
product of the effective tension (difference of the tension in the tight
and slack sides) and the speed. To transmit power by manageable cables,
the strongest material must be used for the cables, and they must be run
at the highest practicable speed."

Substituting Velocity for Mass

This brings us to the basic physics of rope power transmission: in
executing mechanical work, force can be transformed into velocity and
vice versa. In a rope drive, energy can be transmitted at considerable
velocity and little force, while at the receiving station it can be
delivered in the generally more useful form of large force and little
velocity. Increasing the speed of the transmission has a similar effect
as increasing the diameter of the rope.



The Schaffhausen wire rope transmission in 1896. Source: [Stadtarchiv
Schaffhausen](http://www.stadtarchiv-schaffhausen.ch/Bild-Schaffhausen.asp?startSequence=1&level1_ID=9&level2_ID=19&level3_ID=122&level4_ID=1643).

If a rope with a diameter of 2.5 cm (1 inch) can transmit 50 hp at a
velocity of 20 feet per second (22 km/h), the same rope could transmit
250 hp at a velocity of 100 feet per second (110 km/h). Conversely, if a
rope with a diameter of 2.5 cm can transmit 50 hp at a velocity of 20
feet per second, a rope of only half that diameter could deliver the
same amount of power if it was running at twice the speed, and should
run at a velocity of 200 feet per second (220 km/h) in order to transmit
250 hp.

Theoretically, there are no limits to power transmission by rope. "To
put an extreme illustration", wrote Albert Stahl in 1889, "we may
conceive of a speed at which an iron wire as fine as a human hair would
be able to transmit the same amount of work as the original one-inch
\[rope\]". Conversely, we could argue that if we could learn how to run
ropes fast enough, a ship hawser could transmit the power of an entire
nuclear plant \[11\]. While this is far from reality at this point, we
do have better ropes than 120 years ago, and we can run them faster.

> In executing mechanical work, force can be transformed into velocity
> and vice versa

In the nineteenth century, the maximum power able to be transmitted over
a single wire rope transmission was about 300 hp. Unwin explains that:

"The amount of power which is practically possible to transmit by a
single cable is limited. It is not possible by increasing the size of
the cable to transmit an indefinetely large amount of power. The cables
become too heavy to be manageable, and the pulleys too large in
diameter. (...). The peripheries of the driving wheels may have an
anular velocity as great as convenient; the only limit, in fact, being
that the speed shall not be so great as to involve any danger of
destroying the wheels by centrifugal force. One hundred feet per second
has been adopted as the greatest practicable speed."

Running Stronger Ropes at Higher Speeds

Today we have ropes made of artificial fibres, which have a similar
tensile strength to wire ropes, but at one fifth the weight. Such ropes
make it possible to place pulley towers further apart, reducing the
friction loss and improving the efficiency of a rope transmission over
longer distances. We could also try to run thicker ropes if they are
lighter, thereby converting an efficiency advantage into a higher power
capacity.



The Schaffhausen wire rope transmission in 1896. Source: [Stadtarchiv
Schaffhausen](http://www.stadtarchiv-schaffhausen.ch/Bild-Schaffhausen.asp?startSequence=1&level1_ID=9&level2_ID=19&level3_ID=122&level4_ID=1643).

It's also possible to build sturdier pullies, allowing us to run these
ropes faster. Higher speeds would allow more power to be transmitted at
the same rope diameter, or further improve efficiency (because we can
transmit a similar amount of power using lighter ropes). Albert Stahl
already foresaw this possibility in 1889:

"The wheels themselves are made as light as is consistent with strength,
not only for the sake of reducing the friction on the journals of their
shafts to a minimum, but for the equally important object of diminishing
the resistance of the air. It can hardly be doubted that abandoning
spokes entirely, and making the pulley a plain disk, would considerably
improve the performance, could such discs be made at once strong enough
to fulfill the required functions, and light enough not materially to
increase friction."

More Efficient for Small-scale, Decentralized Energy Production

Most telodynamic installations disappeared before the end of the
nineteenth century, although some remained in use until the 1930s. Wire
rope transmission lost the fight against electricity, mainly because the
power network became ever more centralised&mdash;ever larger power plants
would send their power over ever larger distances, which could not be
bridged efficiently by wire ropes.

Furthermore, a wire rope transmission did not offer a solution for the
"last mile" in power transmission. It couldn't be used to distribute
power to a great number of individual machines in a factory, because a
wire rope transmission was not useful under a distance of about 15 m. In
such cases, a wire rope transmission could not operate without millwork.
Although the use of fibrous ropes had improved the workings of millwork,
in this regard telodynamic transmission could not compete with the
alternatives. Electricity, compressed air and hydraulic transmission
offered an overall solution for both short and long-distance power
transmission.

> The trend towards small-scale, decentralised power production means
> that rope transmission might have a place in our energy systems

In spite of these drawbacks, power transmission by ropes might have a
place in our energy systems. Today, there is a trend towards
small-scale, decentralised power production, based on renewable energy
sources. These solar panels, water turbines or wind turbines generate
electricity, but whenever we need to produce mechanical energy,
eliminating the step of generating electricity could result in a
somewhat less practical, but more efficient use of energy.



A wire rope transmission powered by a water wheel in an open-air museum
in Switzerland. Source: [Historische Werkstätte Gebrüder Giger Mulin,
Schnaus](http://www.mulin-schnaus.ch/).

For instance, it is more efficient to power a circular saw by mechanical
energy produced by [a modern version of an old-fashioned
windmill]({filename}/posts/history-of-industrial-windmills.md)
or waterwheel than to convert the mechanical energy generated by wind or
water to electricity by a turbine, and then convert it back into
mechanical energy for powering the sawing machine. If power transmission
is required in such a scenario, a wire rope transmission would be the
most efficient choice.

Long-distance Rope Drives

Another advantage of a wire rope transmission is that it can double as a
transportation system, combined with an aerial ropeway for goods or
passengers. As we have seen in [the article on aerial
ropeways]({filename}/posts/aerial-ropeways-automatic-cargo-transport.md),
it was not unusual to tap power from a gravity-powered aerial ropeway to
power a crane or other machinery. The combination of a wire rope power
transmission with an aerial ropeway only works at lower speeds, so that
power transmission capacity is limited. (An aerial ropeway was generally
five times slower than a rope power transmission). Still, this could
offer interesting advantages for small-scale power production,
especially in mountainous areas.

> If we could learn how to run ropes fast enough, a ship hawser could
> transmit the power of an entire nuclear plant

It may be that the future of wire rope transmission lies in long
distance power transmission after all, at least vertically. The only
research field that dedicates itself to rope drive technology these days
is that of high-altitude kite power. Kites could harvest large amounts
of energy at high altitudes, where winds are stronger and steadier.
Transmitting this energy to Earth is most advantageously done by
mechanical power transmission, says researcher Dave Santos from [KiteLab
Group](http://www.kitelabgroup.com/) in an interview:

"Electric cables would be too heavy. With kites,
power-to-mass-plus-aerodrag is critical, and the mechanical case wins by
a large factor. Wire rope is not quite so amazing as our new materials,
but good enough for a critical advantage over electrical. The main
challenge is to learn how to drive ropes at speeds of
hundreds-of-miles-an-hour."

Ultimately, the rope drive may turn out to be useful for the same reason
it was originally designed: it could unlock the potential of
awkwardly-situated sources of renewable energy.

Kris De Decker (edited by [Deva Lee](http://theculturemuncher.com/))



Related articles

-   [The mechanical transmission of power (1):
    Stangenkunst]({filename}/posts/mechanical-transmission-of-power-stangenkunst.md)
-   [The mechanical transmission of power (2): Jerker line
    systems]({filename}/posts/the-mechanical-transmission-of-power-jerker-line-systems.md)
-   [Wind powered factories: history (and future) of industrial
    windmills]({filename}/posts/history-of-industrial-windmills.md)
-   [Pedal powered farms and factories: the forgotten future of the
    stationary
    bicycle]({filename}/posts/pedal-powered-farms-and-factories.md)
-   [Bike powered electricity generators are not
    sustainable]({filename}/posts/bike-powered-electricity-generators.md)
-   [Aerial ropeways: automatic cargo transport for a
    bargain]({filename}/posts/aerial-ropeways-automatic-cargo-transport.md)
-   [Lost knowledge: ropes and
    knots]({filename}/posts/lost-knowledge-ropes-and-knots.md)
-   [Trolleyboats]({filename}/posts/trolley-canal-boats.md)
-   [Water powered cable
    cars]({filename}/posts/water-powered-cable-trains.md)

Sources:

-   "[Transmission of power by wire
    ropes](http://archive.org/details/transmissionpow02stahgoog)",
    Albert W. Stahl, 1889.
-   "A history of industrial power in the United States, 1780 - 1930.
    Vol 3: The transmission of power", Louis C. Hunter and Lynwood
    Bryant, 1991.
-   "[The wire rope and its
    applications](http://www.archive.org/details/wireropeanditsa00hipkgoog)",
    W.E. Hipkins, 1896
-   "[Description of a new method of transmitting power by means of wire
    ropes](http://www.archive.org/details/descriptionofnew00roebrich)",
    W.A. Roebling, 1872.
-   "[Rope driving: a treatise on the transmission of power by means of
    fibrous
    ropes](http://archive.org/details/ropedrivingatre03flatgoog)",
    John J. Flather, 1900.
-   "Notice sur la transmission telodynamique / Short notice of the
    telodynamic transmission of motive power", C.F. Hirn, 1862
-   "[On the development and transmission of power from central
    stations](https://archive.org/details/ondevelopmentan03unwigoog)",
    W.C. Unwin, 1894. ([alternative
    link](https://archive.org/details/ondevelopmentan01unwigoog)).
-   "[Der Constructeur. Ein Handbuch zum Gebrauch beim
    Mashinen-Entwerfen. Für Mashinen- und Bau-Ingenieure, Fabrikanten
    und technische
    Lehranstalten](http://archive.org/details/derconstructeur00reulgoog)", F.
    Reuleaux, 1869
-   "[Drahtseil
    Transmission](http://dingler.culture.hu-berlin.de/search?q=%3DDrahtseil-Transmission)",
    Polytechnischen Journals (multiple articles, 1850-1910)
-   "[Drahtseil](http://dingler.culture.hu-berlin.de/search?q=drahtseil)",
    Polytechnischen Journals (multiple articles, 1850-1910)
-   "[Transmission des Forces Motrices des Turbine sur le Rhône de la
    Compagnie Générale à
    Bellegarde](http://etcomp.pagesperso-orange.fr/bellegarde/en1877.htm)",
    web page, retrieved February 2013.
-   "[La
    Télémécanique](http://etcomp.pagesperso-orange.fr/bellegarde/telemca.htm)",
    web page, retrieved February 2013
-   "Turbinenanlage und Seiltransmission der Wasserwerkgesellschaft in
    Schaffhausen", J.H. Kronauer, 1867.
-   "A trade catalog on the transmission of power by wire rope",
    Carroll W. Pursell, Jr., Technology and Culture, Vol.16, No.1,
    January 1975, pp 70-73.
-   "From shafts to wires", in "Journal of Economic History", Michael
    Devine, 1983.
-   "[Kritische Vergleichung der Elektrischen Kraftübertragung mit den
    gebräuchlichsten mechanischen
    Uebertragungssystemen](http://ia600307.us.archive.org/24/items/kritischevergle00berigoog/kritischevergle00berigoog.pdf)", A.
    Beringer, 1883
-   "[Cours de mécanique appliquée aux
    machines](http://archive.org/stream/coursdemcanique09boulgoog#page/n253/mode/2up)", J.
    Boulvin, 1891.

Notes:

1.  Stahl, 1889
2.  The Stangenkunst at the Lady Isabella wheel was the most powerful
    installation ever built, transmitting 150 hp using wooden rods. For
    pictures, see [part one of this
    series]({filename}/posts/mechanical-transmission-of-power-stangenkunst.md)
3.  Flather, 1900
4.  Hunter, 1991
5.  Pneumatic and hydraulic transmission will be discussed in a
    forthcoming article
6.  Flather, 1900
7.  Hunter, 1991
8.  Beringer, 1886 and Unwin, 1894
9.  [AC Transmission Line
    Losses](http://large.stanford.edu/courses/2010/ph240/harting1/),
    Stanford University, fall 2010
10. More powerful motors are generally more efficient, less powerful
    motors are less efficient. The figures given are for a 100 hp motor,
    similar to the power transmitted at Oberursel
11. [Dave Santos](http://www.kitelabgroup.com/), personal communication,
    February 2013

