Title: How to Downsize a Transport Network: The Chinese Wheelbarrow
Date: 2011-12-29
Author: Kris De Decker
Category: Obsolete Technology
Tags: chinese wheelbarrow, european wheelbarrow, sustainable transportation
Slug: the-chinese-wheelbarrow
Summary: For being such a seemingly ordinary vehicle, the wheelbarrow has a surprisingly exciting history.
Status: published

![image](/images/chinese-wheelbarrow.png)

For being such a seemingly ordinary vehicle, the wheelbarrow has a
surprisingly exciting history. This is especially true in the East,
where it became a universal means of transportation for both passengers
and goods, even over long distances.

The Chinese wheelbarrow - which was driven by human labour, beasts of
burden and wind power - was of a different design than its European
counterpart. By placing a large wheel in the middle of the vehicle
instead of a smaller wheel in front, one could easily carry three to six
times as much weight than if using a European wheelbarrow.

The one-wheeled vehicle appeared around the time the extensive Ancient
Chinese road infrastructure began to disintegrate. Instead of holding on
to carts, wagons and wide paved roads, the Chinese turned their focus to
a much more easily maintainable network of narrow paths designed for
wheelbarrows. The Europeans, faced with similar problems at the time,
did not adapt and subsequently lost the option of smooth land
transportation for almost one thousand years.

## Transport options over land

Before the arrival of the steam engine, people have always preferred to
[move cargo over water](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/canals/)instead
of over land, because it takes much less effort to do so. But whenever
this was not possible, there remained essentially three options for
transporting goods: carrying them (using aids like a yoke, or none at
all), tying them to [pack
animals](http://www.notechmagazine.com/pack-animals/) (donkeys, mules,
horses, camels, goats), or loading them onto a wheeled cart or wagon
(which could be pulled by humans or animals).

Carrying stuff was the easiest way to go; there was no need to build
roads or vehicles, nor to feed animals. But humans can carry no more
than 25 to 40 kg over long distances, which made this a labour-intensive
method if many goods had to be transported. Pack animals can take about
50 to 150 kg, but they have to be fed, are slightly more demanding than
people in terms of terrain, and they can be stubborn. Pack animals also
require one or more people to guide them.

![image](/images/selling-tinfoil-paper.jpg)

When carrying goods - whether by person or by pack animals - the load is not
only moved in the desired direction but it also undergoes an up and down
movement with every step. This is a significant waste of energy,
especially when transporting heavy goods over long distances. Dragging
stuff does not have this drawback, but in that case you have friction to
fight. 

Pulling a wheeled vehicle is therefore the most energy-efficient
choice, because the cargo only undergoes a horizontal motion and
friction is largely overcome by the wheels. Wheeled carts and wagons,
whether powered by animals or people, can take more weight for the same
energy input, but this advantage comes at a price; you need to build
fairly smooth and level roads, and you need to build a vehicle. If the
vehicle is drawn by an animal, the animal needs to be fed.

![image](/images/chinese-wheelbarrow-in-field.jpg)

When all these factors are taken into consideration, the wheelbarrow could be
considered the most efficient transport option over land, prior to the
Industrial Revolution. It could take a load similar to that of a pack
animal, yet it was powered by human labour and not prone to
disobedience.

Compared to a two-wheeled cart or a four-wheeled wagon, a wheelbarrow
was much cheaper to build because wheel construction was a
labour-intensive job. Although the wheelbarrow required a road, a very
narrow path (about as wide as the wheel) sufficed, and it could be
bumpy. The two handles gave an intimacy of control that made the
wheelbarrow very manoeuvrable.

## East and West: a very different story

The wheelbarrow tells a very distinct history in both the Western and
the Eastern world. Although to this date its origins remain obscure, it
is clear that the vehicle played a much larger role in the East than in
the West. While in recent years there has surfaced some evidence that
the wheelbarrow might have been used on construction sites by the
Ancient Greeks at the end of the fifth century BC, there is no mention
at all of wheelbarrows in Ancient Rome (although that does not exclude
the possibility that they in fact did use them).

![image](/images/many-wheelbarrows.jpg)
Application of wheelbarrows during flood control projects, Shandong,
prior to 1973.

The first sound evidence of the wheelbarrow in the Western world only
emerged in the early thirteenth century AD. In China, their use is
documented extensively from the second century AD onwards - more than a
thousand years earlier. It is interesting to note that the wheelbarrow
appeared at least 2,000 years later than two-wheeled carts and
four-wheeled wagons.

## Handbarrow

When the wheelbarrow finally caught on in Europe, it was used for short
distance cargo transport only, notably in construction, mining and
agriculture. It was not a road vehicle. In the East, however, the
wheelbarrow was also applied to medium and long distance travel,
carrying both cargo and passengers. This use - which had no Western
counterpart - was only possible because of a difference in the design of
the Chinese vehicle. The Western wheelbarrow was very ill-adapted to
carry heavy weights over longer distances, whereas the Chinese design
excelled at it.

![image](/images/handbarrow.jpg)

![image](/images/handbarrow-or-stretcher.jpg)

On the European wheelbarrow the wheel was (and is) invariably placed at
the furthest forward end of the barrow, so that the weight of the burden
is equally distributed between the wheel and the man pushing it. In
fact, the wheel substitutes for the front man of the handbarrow or
stretcher, the carrying tool that was replaced by the wheelbarrow
(illustration above).

## Superior Chinese design

In the characteristic Chinese design a much larger wheel was (and is)
placed in the middle of the wheelbarrow, so that it takes the full
weight of the burden with the human operator only guiding the vehicle.
In fact, in this design the wheel substitutes for a pack animal. In
other words, when the load is 100 kg, the operator of a European
wheelbarrow carries a load of 50 kg while the operator of a Chinese
wheelbarrow carries nothing. He (or she) only has to push or pull, and
steer.

![image](/images/chinese-wheelbarrow-shanghai.jpg)

The result was an extremely powerful and agile vehicle. In 1176 AD, the
Chinese writer TsÃªng Min-Hsing noted enthusiastically:

"The device is so efficient that it can take the place of three men;
moreover, it is safe and steady when passing along dangerous places
(cliff paths, etcetera). Ways which are as winding as the bowels of a
sheep will not defeat it."

> The large central wheel of a Chinese wheelbarrow takes the full weight of the burden with the human operator only guiding the vehicle

![image](/images/drawing-chinese-wheelbarrow.jpg)

The Chinese wheelbarrow - which was also widely in use in present-day
Cambodia, Vietnam and Laos - originally appeared in two basic variants.
One was originally termed the "wooden ox" ("mu niu"), which had the
shafts projecting in front (so that it was pulled), while the other was
termed the "gliding horse" ("liu ma"), which has the shafts projecting
behind (so that it was pushed). 

A combination of both types was also
used, being pulled and pushed by two men. From these two basic types,
many variations evolved. Later, the Chinese also used western-style
wheelbarrows alongside their own design.

![image](/images/chinese-wheelbarrow-hommel.jpg)

## Western praise

The characteristic vehicle stupefied Western foreigners who visited China
during the early modern period. In "Science and civilization in China",
Joseph Needham quotes the Dutch-American merchant Andreas Everardus van
Braam Houckgeest, who visited the country in 1797 and gives an excellent
description of the contraption:

"Among the carriages employed in this country is a wheelbarrow,
singularly constructed, and employed alike for the conveyance of persons
and goods. According as it is more or less heavy loaded, it is directed
by one or two persons, the one dragging it after him, while the other
pushes it forward by the shafts. The wheel, which is very large in
proportion to the barrow, is placed in the centre of the part on which
the load is laid, so that the whole weight bears upon the axle, and the
barrow men support no part of it, but serve merely to move it forward,
and keep it in equilibrum."

> A Chinese traveller sits on one side, and thus serves to counter-balance his baggage, which is placed on the other

"The wheel is as it were cased up in a frame made of laths, and covered over
with a thin plank, four or five inches wide. On each side of the barrow
is a projection, on which the goods are put, or which serves as a seat
for the passengers. A Chinese traveller sits on one side, and thus
serves to counter-balance his baggage, which is placed on the other. If
his bagage is heavier than himself, it is balanced equally on the two
sides, and he seats himself on the board over the wheel, the barrow
being purposely contrived to suit such occasions."

## Wheelbarrow trains

"The sight of this wheelbarrow thus loaded, was entirely new to me. I
could not help remarking its singularity, at the same time that I
admired the simplicity of the invention. I even think, that in many
cases such a barrow would be found much superior to ours."

![image](/images/chinese-wheelbarrow-cargo-passenger.jpg)

![Image](/images/chinese-wheelbarrow-family.jpg)

The American soil scientist F.H. King shows himself equally impressed in
his 1911 publication "Farmers of Forty Centuries":

"We had observed long processions of wheelbarrow men moving from the canals
through the streets carrying large loads of \[crops\] in bundles a foot
long and five inches in diameter. These had come from the country on
boats each carrying tons of the succulent leaves and stems. We had
counted as many as fifty wheelbarrow men passing a given point on the
street in quick succession, each carrying 300 to 500 pounds of \[crops\]
and moving so rapidly that it was not easy to keep pace with them, as we
learned in following one of the trains during twenty minutes to its
destination. During this time not a man in the train haltened or
slackened his pace. This same type of vehicle, too, is one of the common
means of transporting people, especially Chinese women, and four, six
and even eight may be seen riding together, propelled by a single
wheelbarrow man."

> This description would not be complete without mentioning the squeaking of the unoiled axle, a nightmare to foreigners, which does not bother the Chinese in the least

Rudolf Hommel, in his 1937 book "China at work" (based on a 1921 travel through
the country), seems to be most intrigued by the ingenuity of the
low-tech design, going into technical details:

"While there are many kinds of wheelbarrows, the one shown \[here\] is
typical of them all; the principle always being the same, i.e. one large
wheel surrounded by a framework, guarding the upper part of the wheel
from contact with merchandise or persons transported. The two long
shafts, held at a proper distance from each other by two crosspieces,
terminate in the handlebars, and form the basis of the whole vehicle.
Into them is mortised the lattice work which surrounds the wheel. On
each side a carrying frame is formed by curved bars attached to the main
shafts by crosspieces."

![image](/images/chinese-wheelbarrow-1910.jpg)

## Low-tech masterpieces

"The wheel, about 3 feet in diameter, is made entirely of wood and has
two iron bands around the hub, and an iron tire. The axle is made of
some very strong wood. From the frame of the wheelbarrow two pieces
extend downward with the bearing holes for the axle. This looks rather
precarious, and yet these pieces stand up splendidly under the heavy
strain of immense loads and the considerable bumping over the miserable
roads. These wheelbarrows are masterpieces of joinery and special care
is bestowed on the selection of the best grades of hard wood for all
parts. This description would not be complete without mentioning the
squeaking of the unoiled axle, a nightmare to foreigners, which does not
bother the Chinese in the least."

![image](/images/caravan-of-chinese-wheelbarrows.jpg)

Just as other Western observers, Hommel watched the vehicles pass by in
admiration:

"Besides transporting goods with these wheelbarrows, the Chinese use
them also for passengers. I have seen as many as six people on them,
three sitting on each side with their feet dangling down. If only one
person is conveyed the driver balances the wheelbarrow skilfully with
the wheel tilted at a considerable angle from the vertical. If a peasant
wants to take a pig to the market, he saves himself all the trouble of
guiding the recalcitrant beast, by tying it upon the wheelbarrow and
wheeling it to the market."

## Mobile forts

As so many other innovative technologies, the Chinese wheelbarrow was
orginally developed for military purposes. The first records mention its
use for supplying food to the army. The wheelbarrow gave the Chinese
armies such an advantage in moving goods that it was kept secret - early
Chinese writings talk about wheelbarrows in code. True to its origin,
the wheelbarrow remained in use for military operations, though not only
to supply food to soldiers. In 1176, TsÃªng Min-Hsing alluded to the
military use of the wheelbarrow in forming protective layers.

> The Ancient Chinese used their wheelbarrows as a defence against the onslaught of cavalry, a tactical system that remained in use during later times using two-wheeled carts

His words are quoted by Joseph Needham:

"Not only is it useful for transporting army rations, but at need it
can be employed as a defensive obstruction against cavalry. Since the
digging of trenches and moats, and the building of forts, take time, the
wheelbarrows can be deployed round the perimeter so that the enemy's
horses cannot easily pass over. This kind of vehicle can readily go
forward and withdraw, and can be used for any purpose. It might well be
called a 'mobile fort'."

![image](/images/vietnam-wheelbarrow-carrying-pig.jpg)

Watching the Vietnamese wheelbarrow pictured above, the defensive use of
the vehicle is easy to imagine. According to Needham, it was the Chinese
with their wheelbarrows who pioneered the use of 'laagers' or 'mobile
forts' as a defence against the onslaught of cavalry, a tactical system
that remained in use during later times using two-wheeled carts.

## Animal traction

![image](/images/chinese-wheelbarrow-animal-traction.jpg)

A remarkable feature of the Chinese wheelbarrow was the combined use of
human and animal traction, which became common from an early date on.
This practice can be seen in a 1126 painting by Chang TsÃª-Tuan, which is
described by Joseph Needham:

"The painting depicts the popular life of the capital KhaifÃªng at the
time of the spring festival. Many wheelbarrows are moving or stationary
in the streets of the city. All but one have the large central wheel and
some are very heavily laden. During the loading and unloading the
wheelbarrows rest on the side-legs. One is being pushed by a single man,
and in all cases the porter steadies the vehicle by the shafts behind,
while traction is effected either by one man in shafts and one mule or
donkey with collar-harness and traces, or by two animals side by side
similarly attached."

> The use of auxiliary power from animals and wind (the two were sometimes combined) made it possible to design larger wheelbarrows that could take more cargo

![image](/images/chinese-wheelbarrow-animal-traction2.jpg)

The latter configuration is shown again in a picture in the [Thien Kung
Khai Wu](http://openlibrary.org/books/OL3798357M/Tien-kung-kai-wu)
(1637), where in the text we read:

"The northern one-wheeled barrow (tu yuan chhÃª) is pushed by one man from
behind, with (one or more) donkeys pulling it from the front; it is
hired by those who dislike riding (on horseback). The travellers sit on
opposite sides to balance it, and a mat roof shields them from sun and
wind. This kind of conveyance goes as far north as Chhang-an and
Chi-ning, and also comes to the capital. When not carrying passengers
these barrows will take as much as 4 or 5 tan of goods \[about 6 cwt or
300 kg\]. The one-wheeled barrow (tu lun thui chhe) of the south is also
pushed by one man (but without animal aid), and carries only 2 tan. When
it meets pot-holes (in the road) it has to stop; in any case it seldom
goes more than 100 li \[50 km\]."

## Wind powered wheelbarrows

An even more surprising method to augment human power in moving the
wheelbarrow was the use of sails. The date of the introduction of the
sailing wheelbarrow is unknown, but Joseph Needham notes that this
contraption (the chia fan chhÃª) was still widely used in China at the
time of writing (1965), notably in Honan and in the coastal provinces
such as Shantung. Rudolf Hommel and F.H. King also spotted and described
the vehicles. While some sails were very simple pieces of cloth, others
were perfect miniatures of the ones used on a junk (a Chinese sailboat),
easily adjustable by the driver.

![image](/images/two-sailing-wheelbarrows.jpg)


The use of auxiliary power from animals and wind (the two were sometimes
combined) made it possible to design larger wheelbarrows that could take
more cargo. Again, it is worthy to quote Andreas Everardus van Braam
Houckgeest, writing in 1797:

"Near the southern border of Shantung one finds a kind of wheelbarrow much
larger than that which I have been describing, and drawn by a horse or a
mule. But judge of my surprise when today I saw a whole fleet of
wheelbarrows of the same size. I say, with deliberation, a fleet, for
each of them had a sail, mounted on a small mast exactly fixed in a
socket arranged at the forward end of the barrow."

"The sail, made of matting, or more often of cloth, is five or six feet
\[1.5 to 2 m\] high, and three or four feet broad,, with stays, sheets,
and halyards, just as on a Chinese ship. The sheets join the shafts of
the wheelbarrow and can thus be manipulated by the man in charge."

![image](/images/sailing-wheelbarrow.jpg)

> While some sails were very simple pieces of cloth, others were perfect miniatures of the ones used on a junk (a Chinese sailboat), easily adjustable by the driver

"One had to grant the apparatus was not a freak, but an arrangement by which,
with a favourable wind, the wheelbarrow porters could be greatly
assisted. Otherwise such a complicated thing would have been only a
bizarre curiosity. I could not help admiring the combination, and was
filled with sincere pleasure in seeing twenty or so of these
sailing-wheelbarrows setting their course one behind the other."

![image](/images/wind-powered-wheelbarrow-1905.jpg)

## Wheelbarrows on rails

The Chinese wheelbarrow kept evolving even after the arrival of the
Industrial evolution, adapting modern materials and wheels. Another
noteworthy example of this is the so-called 'piepkar', which showed up
on the island of Billiton at the coast of Sumatra at the turn of the
twentieth century. There, a Dutch tin mining company was faced with very
bad roads. The solution? A great example of combining Eastern and
Western knowledge; wheelbarrows equipped with very narrow wheels, guided
by iron rails. The technology - which was in use from the 1880s to
around 1920 - reminds of the horse-drawn rail cars that became popular
in Western cities at the time.

## The decay of the Chinese road infrastructure

The importance of the Chinese wheelbarrow can only be understood in the
context of the Chinese transportation network. Prior to the third
century AD, China had an extensive and well-maintained road network
suited for animal powered carts and wagons. It was only surpassed in
length by the Ancient Roman road network. The Chinese road
infrastructure attained a total length of about 25,000 miles (40,000
km), compared to almost 50,000 miles (80,000 km) for the Roman system.

> The importance of the Chinese wheelbarrow can only be understood in the context of the Chinese transportation network

The Chinese and Roman road systems were built (independently) over the
course of five centuries during the same period in history. Curiously,
due to (unrelated) political reasons, both systems also started to
disintegrate side by side from the third century AD onwards, and herein
lies the explanation for the success of the Chinese wheelbarrow. As we
have seen, the one-wheeled vehicle appeared during this period, and this
is no coincidence. Increasingly, it was the only vehicle that could be
operated on the deteriorating road network. As F.H. King observed: "For
adaptability to the worst road conditions no vehicle equals the
wheelbarrow, progressing by one wheel and two feet".

![image](/images/wheelbarrow-restaurant.jpg)

In 1937, Rudolf Hommel goes on complaining about the Chinese roads:

"In olden times, excellent wide roads were in existence in China,
suitable for chariots, coaches, and wagons of many descriptions.
Present-day conditions show a different picture, especially in Southern
and Central China where the two-wheeled cart is not known. The splendid
roads are gone, and in their place, we find only narrow paths, scarcely
wide enough for foot passengers and wheelbarrows. The two-wheeled cart
survived only in North China under the sway of the court of Peking,
where the important business of victualizing the capital was sufficient
urge to keep up the roads."

"The Chinese peasant, ever intent to gain more ground for the
cultivation of his crops, has gradually reduced the width of former
highways, unhampered by a watchful government. In fact, the greedy
officials winked at such encroachments, as long as they have been
thereby enabled to exact increased contributions in taxes from the
hardworking peasants. It is only within the last five years that an
extensive program of road building has been carried out."

## Pathways designed for wheelbarrows

![image](/images/wheelbarrow-path-joseph-needham.jpg)

However, it seems that Rudolf Hommel got it wrong, and was looking at the Chinese
roads with a Western bias. Joseph Needham tells a more positive story,
noting that the network of wide roads was gradually replaced by an
informal, low-tech infrastructure that was not less ingenious than the
wheelbarrows that operated on it. The Chinese answer to a decaying road infrastructure went much
further than the adaptation of their vehicles:

"In many periods the government was interested primarily, and sometimes
exclusively, in those roads and water-ways which were significant for
tax-grain transportation and the conveyance of official messages. The
upkeep of a multitude of local roads and paved pathways devolved,
therefore, upon the people themselves, acting in their co-operative
capacity under village elders and small-town worthies. In this context,
religious associations, such as the Taoists Yellow Turbans about 180 AD,
later so politically important, or the Buddhist fraternities afterwards,
played a significant part. Making good roads was nothing less than a
pious duty."

> The network of wide roads was gradually replaced by an informal, low-tech infrastructure that was not less ingenious than the wheelbarrows that operated on it

![image](/images/old-road-near-bejing-needham.jpg)

"Thus in the course of time, quite apart from the Ancient and medieval
imperial highways, China's landscape became shot through with millions
of miles of well-paved paths, suitable chiefly for pedestrians, porters
with carrying poles, pushers of wheelbarrows, and men carrying litters.
Rough unpaved cart-tracks predominated only in the Eastern plains. Those
who, like the author, have followed these paved ways past woods and
rice-fields for many a mile cannot think of them without intense
nostalgia. There was a long tradition of such privately initiated roads
going back to the Han or even earlier, and their total mileage far
outstripped that of the government main roads as the ages passed."

Interestingly, the modern, twentieth-century road network that appeared
in China, and that Hommel was alluding to in 1937, did not immediately
gave way to the automobile, but to another low-tech vehicle that is a
worthy competitor for the wheelbarrow: the
[bicycle](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/pedal-power/), a product of the
Industrial Revolution that is even more efficient. It will probably take
us (and the 21st-century Chinese) another few decades before we realise
how smart the Chinese transport infrastructure was.

## The decay of the Western road infrastructure

The use of wheelbarrows in combination with specially designed narrow
pathways made land transportation in China considerably more efficient
than in Europe for a period of almost 1,500 years. Today, critcism on
the omnipresent automobile is often ridiculed by saying that we cannot
go back to horses and carts, without realizing that the combination of
horses and carts is far from evident and not as low-tech as it seems.
History clearly shows that an extensive road infrastructure is a very
vulnerable thing.

Europe was also left with a deteriorating road network after the demise
of the Roman Empire, though the Europeans could buy some time. Because
it was sturdier (using piles of stone and concrete rather than the early
form of asphalt applied by the Chinese), the Roman road infrastructure
remained relatively useful until about the 11th century AD, after which
it was largely abandoned. But even before that time, the destruction of
bridges and road facilities by the barbarians - or by the locals in
order to defend themselves against the barbarians - gradually dimished
its usefulness. Lack of maintenance and the plundering of paving stone
did the rest. Moreover, the appearance of new towns and capitals (such
as Paris) required new routes that did not always coincide with the
existing Roman roads.

![image][/images/more-wheelbarrows.jpg]

Contrary to the Chinese, the Europeans did not develop a new vehicle and
appropriate infrastructure of paths to make up for the loss of the
Ancient highways. New roads appeared during the economic revival of the
late Middle Ages, but these were not paved or hardened in any other way.
This made them at best inefficient in good weather and nearly impassable
when (and after) it rained. Furthermore, because of the absence of
foundations, soil erosion caused by heavy rains could wash entire roads
away. As a result, the use of carts and wagons all but disappeared in
medieval Europe, while nothing else came in place. For people, the
options of land transportation again became limited to walking or - only
for the rich - horseback riding.

> In most European countries, smooth wheeled traffic only made a comeback during the nineteenth century

Cargo was most often transported by pack animals (mostly donkeys and
mules, sometimes horses), or simply by carrying it. With the exception
of England, where wheeled traffic resurged from as early as the 14th
century in some places, and France, where some sturdier roads (unpaved
but with foundations) appeared in some regions during the late 16th
century, smooth operating wheeled traffic only made a comeback in Europe
during the nineteenth century - at the same time as the first railroads
appeared.

## Ox drawn carts

Carts and wagons drawn by oxen remained in use throughout the centuries
in Europe, for heavy or large-sized loads that could not be transported
by rivers or by sea. However, road conditions often required large spans
of oxen, which made wheeled transportation of heavy loads ridiculously
expensive and limited to very short distances. Because of friction, the
nature of a road surface greatly determines how efficient wheeled
transport will be. In "Energy in world history", Vaclac Smil writes:

"On a smooth, hard, dry road, a force of only about 30 kg is needed to
wheel a 1 tonne load. A loose, gravelly surface may easily call for five
times as much draft. On sandy or muddy roads the multiple can be seven
to ten times higher."

This had important consequences, as we have seen in the [article about
the pre-industrial use of fossil
fuels]({filename}/posts/peat-and-coal-fossil-fuels-in-pre-industrial-times.md).
Many countries could not capitalize on most of their energy resources,
be it wood or peat or coal, because transporting them over land took
more time and energy (in terms of animal feed) than they could afford.
If they would have been aware of the Chinese wheelbarrow, the Europeans
could have followed a similar strategy as the Chinese, using their
limited resources to construct and maintain smooth but narrow pathways
(and bridges) while downsizing their vehicles. As was noted in several
of the historical sources mentioned above, the Chinese wheelbarrow,
aided by a second man, an animal, or wind power, could transport up to
300 kg of cargo. This was almost as much as the maximum allowed cargo
for horse and ox drawn carts in Ancient Rome (326 kg and 490 kg
respectively).

## Lessons for the future

Of course, it was not only the wheelbarrow that kept Chinese
communication running after the second century AD. At least as important
was the impressive network of artificial canals that complemented it.
This infrastructure became ever more important after the detoriation of
the road network. For example, the Grand Canal, which ran from Hangzhou
to Bejing over a distance of 1800 km, was completed in 1327 after 700
years of digging.

![image](/images/fun-with-wheelbarrows.jpg)

In Europe, the first (relatively modest) canals were only built during
the 16th century, and most of them only appeared in the eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries. The Chinese wheelbarrow alone could not have given
Europe an equally effective transport infrastructure as the Chinese, but
there is no doubt that it could have made life in medieval Europe a
great deal easier.

The story of the Chinese wheelbarrow also teaches us an obvious lesson
for the future. While many of us today are not even prepared to change
their limousine for a small car, let alone their automobile for a
bicycle, we forget that neither one of these vehicles can function
without suited roads. Building and maintaining roads is very hard work,
and history shows that it is far from evident to keep up with it.

In this regard, it is important to keep in mind that we won't be as
lucky as the medieval Europeans who inherited one of the best and most
durable road networks in the world. Our road infrastructure - mostly
based on asphalt - is more similar to that of the Ancient Chinese and
will disintegrate at a much faster rate if we lose our ability to
maintain it. The Chinese wheelbarrow - and with it [many other forgotten
low-tech transportation
options](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/transport/) - might one day come
in very handy again.

Kris De Decker (edited by Shameez Joubert)

## Sources:

* "[Science and Civilisation in China, Volume 4: Physics and Physical
    Technology, Part 2, Mechanical
    Engineering](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0521058031/ref=as_li_tf_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0521058031)![](http://www.assoc-amazon.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=as2&o=1&a=0521058031)", Joseph Needham, 1965 (the wheelbarrow)
* "[Science and Civilisation in China, Volume 4: Physics and Physical
    Technology, Part 3: Civil engineering and
    nautics](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B001K756HE/ref=as_li_tf_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=B001K756HE)![](http://www.assoc-amazon.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=as2&o=1&a=B001K756HE)", Joseph Needham, 1971 (the road network)
* "[Hommel: China at
    Work](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0262580152/ref=as_li_tf_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0262580152)",
    Rudolf P. Hommel, 1937
* "[Farmers of Forty Centuries, or, permanent agriculture in China,
    Korea and
    Japan](http://www.archive.org/stream/cu31924073872685#page/n11/mode/2up)",
    F.H. King, 1911
* "The medieval wheelbarrow", Andrea L. Matthies, in "Technology and
    Culture", Vol. 32, No.2, April 1991
* "The origins of the wheelbarrow", M.J.T. Lewis, in "Technology and
    Culture", Vol.35, No.3, July 1994
* "[Roads and pavements in
    France](http://www.archive.org/details/roadspavementsin00rockrich)",
    Alfred Perkens Rockwell, 1895
* "Voyager au Moyen Age", Jean Verdon, 2007 (original edition 1998)
* "Histoire gÃ©nÃ©rale des techniques" (Tome I / Tome II), Maurice
    Dumas, 1962
* "[Horse hauling: a revolution in vehicle transport in 12th and 13th
    century
    England](http://past.oxfordjournals.org/content/103/1/37.extract)",
    John Langdon, 1984
* "[A social and economic history of medieval
    Europe](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B000M1VFFQ/ref=as_li_tf_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=B000M1VFFQ)![](http://www.assoc-amazon.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=as2&o=1&a=B000M1VFFQ)", Gerald Hodgett, 1972
* "[Science and Technology in Medieval European
    Life](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0313337543/ref=as_li_tf_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0313337543)",
    Jeffrey R. Wigelsworth, 2006
* "[Medieval sourcebook: Richer of Rheims: Journey to Chartres, 10th
    century](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/source/richer1.asp)",
    Michael Markowski (webpage)
* "[Inland transportation in England during the fourteenth
    century](http://www.jstor.org/pss/2847159)", J.F. Williard, 1926
* "The use of carts in the fourteenth century", J.F. Williard, 1932
* "[Energy In World
    History](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0813319013/ref=as_li_tf_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0813319013)",
    Vaclac Smil, 1994
* "[The Subterranean
    Forest](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/1874267537/ref=as_li_tf_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=lowtemagaz-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=1874267537)![](http://www.assoc-amazon.com/e/ir?t=lowtemagaz-20&l=as2&o=1&a=1874267537)", Rolf Pieter Sieferle, 2010
* [Coming home with riches: the wheelbarrow as an auspicious motif in
    popular Chinese
    prints](http://spot.colorado.edu/~richtea/prints.html), Antje
    Richter, 2004
* [The wheelbarrow](http://www.uh.edu/engines/epi377.htm), Engines of
    our ingenuity, John Lienhard
* [Institut d'Asie Orientale](http://iao.ish-lyon.cnrs.fr/): pictures
    ([overview](http://www.virtualshanghai.net/Repository.php?ID=9&)).
* [Lantern slide
    collection](http://quod.lib.umich.edu/u/ummu2ic?page=index), Art,
    Architecture and Engineering Library.
