Title: Trolley canal boats
Date: 2009-12-15 19:10
Author: Kris De Decker
Category: Obsolete Technology
Tags: canal barges, canals, electric boats, obsolete technology, trolleyboats, trolleytrucks
Slug: trolley-canal-boats-2
Status: published



For many centuries, canal boats were propelled by men, horses or mules
on the towpath beside the water. Before diesel power took over,
engineers developed several interesting methods powered by electricity:
trolleyboats, floating funiculars and electric mules. Many of these
ecological solutions could be applied today instead of diesel engines.
Because of the very low energy requirements, they could easily be
powered by renewable energy, generated on the spot by water turbines
located at sluices. One trolleyboat line is still in use.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Most of these systems are at least four times more efficient than diesel
powered barges

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


As described in a previous article, [trolleybuses and
trolleytrucks]({filename}/posts/trolleytrucks-trolleybuses-cargotrams.md)
would make a lot of sense these days because they could deliver electric
transport for a bargain, using simple and existing technology.

The same method was once applied to boats, too. Not for sea travel, of
course, but for canal transport.Some canal boats were also propelled by
systems that resemble those of [cable
trains]({filename}/posts/water-powered-cable-trains.md),
and yet another method combined common railway technology with canal
barges.

All this happened at the turn of the twentieth century, mainly in France
and to a lesser extent in Germany, in Belgium and (only experimentally)
in the United States.

Up until the second half of the nineteenth century, canal barges were
the main means of transporting goods over longer distances through
regions where no good natural waterways existed. In all of Europe by the
end of the 1800s, there were between 19,300 and 24,000 kilometres
(12,000 and 15,000 miles) of canals. In the US in 1880, the total length
of canals was around 7,200 kilometres (4,500 miles).


Mules and horses

From the 1840s onwards the rapid progress of railways threatened to make
these canal networks obsolete. In 1880, already 3,200 km (2,000 miles)
of canals in the US had fallen into disuse because of the rise of the
railroads.

Canal boats, which had a capacity of up to 240 tons in the second half
of the 19th century, were towed by horses or mules on the tow path
([sails]({filename}/posts/sailing-ships-large-crew-automated-control.md)
were not an option on most canals). This method was very efficient
compared to non-motorised land-based transport; a horse could carry 10
times more cargo in this way than was possible when hauling a cart on
the road. Compared to the new railways, however, the cargo capacity of
animal powered barges was limited and the speed was low.

In most countries, animal traction remained the only method in use on
the canals, until it was superseded by diesel engines in the 1930s or
later, or until the canals fell into disrepair altogether (like in the
United Kingdom). But, faced with the decline in traffic at the end of
the 1800s, some governments and canal companies attracted engineers to
look for more modern and efficient ways of boat propulsion to compete
with the railways.


Steam barges

The obvious solution to canal barge transport was the [steam
engine](http://www.notechmagazine.com/2009/05/steam-engine-drawings-pictures-galleries.html)
- the same technology that kept trains going. Some canal barges were
indeed converted to independent steam powered vehicles or towboats, but
it soon became clear that this could not work when applied to large
numbers of boats.

The reason was the state of the canals. In those times, canals were
simply a large ditch without reinforced banks. If all barges would be
equipped with steam engines onboard, or towed by steam boats, then the
wash of the screws (or paddlewheels) would have destroyed the banks of
the canals in no time.

Another obstacle was the limited depth of most canals, not exceeding 2
to 2.5 metres (6.5 to 8.5 feet) and this only in the [middle of the
canal](http://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fichier:Bief_ass%C3%A9ch%C3%A9_du_canal_de_Bougogne_%C3%A0_Dijon2.JPG).
This made higher speeds problematic, because the stern of a propeller
powered boat comes to lay deeper in the water as speed goes up.

A third problem of steam power was that the bulky engine took away cargo
space, thereby lowering the efficiency of the transport system. This
made that, even though steam boats already existed since the end of the
1700s, and many of them were in use on rivers and lakes, only 84 of them
were operated on American canals in 1906.

Batteries

Because of these challenges, another obvious method - electric boats
powered by batteries - was no solution either. At the end of the 19th
century, [thousands of electric automobiles were in use on the
streets]({filename}/posts/the-status-quo-of-electric-cars-better-batteries-same-range.md).


The first "automobile" or independent boat carrying its own battery was
already demonstrated in 1838, and at the end of the 1870s one even made
a trip across the English Channel. But, these boats were not suited for
canal transportation. The propeller or paddlewheel would create the same
wash as a steamboat, destroying the delicate canal banks. The batteries
would take up almost all the cargo space.

Overview of electrical methods

Ultimately, engineers found the solution in electric propulsion without
the use of batteries. Roughly, all methods can be divided in five
classes:

-   Trolley propeller towing - engine on the boat.
-   Trolley submerged chain towing - engine on the boat.
-   Funiculars - engine on the banks.
-   Manned electric mules - engine on the banks.
-   Unmanned electric mules - engine on the banks or over the water.


Most of these systems were initially powered by steam engines, and later
adapted to electricity, which made them much more efficient and
practical. Some systems were afterwards converted to diesel engines.
With the exception of funicular boats, all electrical systems were fed
by a trolley line.

Apart from some regional success stories, none of these technologies
found widespread use, in spite of the many successful tests. Peak oil
and global warming were no concerns in those times. Most countries chose
to further deepen out and reinforce their canals in order to allow
self-propelled steam and, a bit later, diesel boats.

At the end of the article I will explain why it is time to ditch these
and finally give the trolley systems the attention they deserve; they
are our best chance to develop a completely oil independent, land-based
cargo transport network with a large capacity.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------



1\. Trolley propeller systems

One of the first alternatives for animal power was the trolley propeller
system. Only four years after the first experimental trolleybus, Frank
W. Hawley adapted an ordinary steam canal boat to a trolleyboat (named
after him), which was tested on the Erie Canal in the US in 1893.


The two electric motors (of 25 HP each) powered two screw propellers and
received current from a pair of wires suspended over the canal through
two ordinary underbearing trolley poles (picture on the right).

As the boat had more or less lateral movement, the contact arrangement
had to be flexible, and as the canal could not be used as a return, a
double metallic circuit had to be used. This necessitated two wires for
boats going in each direction.



Wash

The trolleyboat turned out to be a better option than the battery
powered electric boat, because the cargo space was mainly left intact -
electric motors were smaller than steam engines and no batteries were
needed. Moreover, the range of the boat was unlimited.

However, as with battery powered electrical boats and steam barges, the
propeller created a wash and thus posed similar problems to the canal
banks. The only way around this was to lower the speed, which made
trolleyboats not that attractive.

Trolley ferry

The trolley system was never installed on the Erie canal, and neither
were other electrical propulsion systems, because eventually the canal -
566 kilometres (352 miles) long and the most important in the US - was
deepened out and reinforced in 1918 to allow the use of self-propelled
boats. A plan for a trolley powered ferry did not make it either
(illustration below).



In 1903, the Germans experimented with a propeller powered trolleyboat
on the Teltow canal (first picture above). It was a very sophisticated
machine, creating almost no wash because of a special arrangement of
three propellers, but eventually the electric mule (see further) was
preferred.

Below is a picture of what seems to be the only propeller powered
trolleyboat line that was ever operated in a commercial way. It was
installed along a 4 kilometre (2.5 miles) stretch of the Charleroi Canal
in Belgium in 1899. The trolleyboats towed unpowered canal barges. The
line formed part of a 47 kilometre (29 miles) long trajectory served by
electric mules (see further) and was only operated for a couple of
years.



----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


2. Trolley submerged cable or chain towing

In Germany, France and Belgium, another system was *en vogue*: chain
towing.

Initially steam engines were used (see illustration on the right and
picture below), but some of these were later replaced by electric
motors, combined with a trolley system.



This method (first put into practice by french engineer François
Galliot) combined the trolley system described above with an alternative
means of boat propulsion: a cable or chain laid at the bottom of the
canal. It was lifted and passed over rollers or wheels on the boat,
which firmly gripped the chain or cable. These rollers were rotated by a
motor on the boat (on top or on the side) and as they revolved they
pulled the boat along the waterway on the cable.

The general arrangement was very much the same as in the trolley
propeller method, but instead of turning a propeller, the motor would
revolve the hauling drums or machinery. An important advantage was that
the system did not create a wash and was thus compatible with the
shallow and delicate canals.





Another advantage was that, instead of having a double contact wire and
double contact trolley carriage, the cable could be used as the return
conductor. As this would necessitate only one contact wire, the contact
arrangement and switching devices would be simpler and thus cheaper.

Bourgogne canal

Steam powered cable haulers were already operated at the end of the
1860s, mostly on rivers. Two of these navigated on a 125 km (78 miles)
stretch of the Erie Canal in the US from 1873 to 1880, but they were
said to interfere so much with other traffic that their use was
discontinued.



Towards the end of 1893 (the same year that a propeller powered
trolleyboat was tested on the Erie Canal), the first electrically
powered submerged flexible cable system was set up in the Bourgogne
canal in France. The hauling machinery was operated by an electric motor
on the boat, which received current from an overhead trolley circuit
(see picture above). Operation started in 1894 and the line remained in
service for more than 20 years.

Tunnels

The 6 kilometre (3.7 miles) long track went through a 3.3 kilometre (2
miles) long tunnel (in "Pouilly-en-Auxois") and replaced a steam powered
cable hauler that was in use since 1867. That this electric system (and
others, see further below) served to pass through tunnel was no
coincidence.


Most of the underground canals going through mountains and hillsides
were too narrow for a towpath. This meant that the horses were led over
the mountain while the boat was moved through the tunnel by human power.

This happened by means of men lying on boards across the top of the
boats, literally "walking" on the ceiling and so "legging" the boat
through the tunnel. These men could be the bargemen themselves, or
people who offered this service to them (the "leggers").

Of course, this method was painstakingly slow, and thus these tunnels
were the first to be equipped with submerged cable steam towers.
However, because of the exhaust fumes, this propulsion method was not
really compatible with the small space and so they were converted to
electricity when this became technically feasible.

Zero emissions

The installation at the Bourgogne canal gave great satisfaction and it
was the first electrical boat propulsion system to be operated on a
practical, commercial basis. Moreover, it was a zero-emissions transport
system: the electricity was generated on both sides of the track by
means of turbines placed at the cascades of two successive locks, having
a fall of 7.5 metres (24.5 feet). Apart from the ecological advantage,
the use of renewable electricity made that the line was working at
almost no cost.

Only trolleyline still in use

Much later, in 1933, another line was set up on the "canal de la Marne
au Rhin". This system is still in use today (pictures below) and
replaced a funicular system (see further below). Also in this case, the
trolley line was used to cross a subterranean tunnel, this one ("tunnel
de Mauvages") being almost 5 kilometres (3.1 miles) long.

In 1936, the trolleyboat line was combined with electric mules (see
further below) that operated alongside the whole canal except for the
tunnel itself (where there is no towpath). The system is still working
today because the fumes of diesel powered barges (which have replaced
the electric mules along the rest of the canal) would suffocate the
bargemen in the long tunnel.



The method had some disadvantages, which prevented it from being used on
a larger scale. The first was the difficulty in rounding curves. As the
chain or cable was laying loosely at the bottom, it frequently came very
close to the banks, so the boats could run into the banks and sustain
damage.

Secondly, if there were many locks along the canal, this necessitated
the picking up and dropping of the cable a great number of times which
caused considerable difficulty and loss of time. Therefore, submerged
cable towing was mostly limited to straight stretches of canal without
too many sluices.


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


3. Cable towing (funiculars)

French engineer Maurice Lévy was inspired by
[funiculars]({filename}/posts/water-powered-cable-trains.md)
instead of trolleybuses. In 1888, he conducted a number of experiments
with cable hauling in the neighbourhood of Paris, at the junction of the
Saint Maur and Saint Maurice Canals. This point was especially selected
because the canals meet at right angles and hence present peculiar
difficulties in turning the boats.

Contrary to the two systems described above, there was no motor or
engine placed on the boat itself. The boats were propelled by a moving
cable on each bank, carried on supports provided with pulleys, and
operated parallel to the canal. The cable was moved by a fixed motor,
also placed on the banks of the river, and the boats were attached to
the cable by means of hauling ropes. The technology was also used for
[aerial
ropeways]({filename}/posts/aerial-ropeways-automatic-cargo-transport.md)
and [wire rope power
transmission]({filename}/posts/the-mechanical-transmission-of-power-3-wire-ropes.md).


Protruding from the boat were suitable arms, to which devices were
attached that were adapted to grip and hold the moving cable. The boat
could be started or stopped by connecting or disconnecting the grip with
the cable by suitable devices on the boat. The system allowed for a
speed of 4 kilometres per hour (2.5 miles per hour).



The cable was installed a few yards from the edge, in order to leave the
tow path free. The method was thus easy to combine with horse and mule
powered canal boats (contrary to the methods described below). The
pulleys (shown on the smaller images above and below) were placed
vertically on a straight line, and more or less inclined on curves.


The cable was provided with links to which the rope was affixed that
hauls the boat along (see engraving below). These links, fixed between
rings, were capable of revolving freely upon the cable so as to avoid
troubles from the latter's tension. In order to prevent the cable from
jumping out of the pulley channels, it was kept in place by a small
overriding roller, and the flanges of the pulleys were notched, so as to
allow the hauling links to go by.

At its starting point, the cable passed over three large pulleys,
actuated by the steam engine, which is placed in a small power house on
the edge of the canal (see the above illustration). To the right, there
was a fourth pulley carried by a small car fitted with a counterpoise
which served to keep the cable uniformly taut.



Cable towing had some interesting advantages over the previous method.
Just as with submerged chain towing, no wash was created. Furthermore,
there was no need to place an engine onboard, which meant that no cargo
space was sacrificed, and that existing barges could be used without any
further adaptations, or without the use of a towboat. Moreover, taking
turns and passing sluices went much smoother than with the submerged
chain method described above.

Applications

In spite of obvious advantages, the experimental line was dismantled
some years later (as happened with a similar experiment in Germany) and
Lévy installed his only commercial system on the Aisne-Marne Canal,
towing the barges through the 2.6 kilometre (1.6 miles) long
Mont-de-Billy tunnel. It remained in use until the 1940s (picture
below).



The problem was that the Frenchman used steam engines to move the cable
- in that time, he did not have much choice. Every cable would be
operated in lengths of about 8 kilometres (5 miles) each way from the
power station, the outgoing cable being used for boats going in one
direction and the return cable (after crossing the canal) for those
going in the other way (see illustration below). Arriving at the end of
each circuit, the boats would be disconnected from the cable, connected
to the cable of the next circuit, and so on. This meant that each
circuit would have required its own steam engine, and personnel to
operate it, and this would have been prohibitively expensive.

Electrical funiculars

Maurice Lévy was ahead of his time, because 10 years later the
technology for electricity generation had much improved. The Americans
designed a similar plan but using electrical generators, fed by a cheap
source of power such as a waterfall at a sluice. In this case, not every
circuit required its own generator, because the electricity could be
transported (see illustration below). Unfortunately, as mentioned
earlier, the US eventually chose to deepen and reinforce the canals to
give way to self-propelled boats, and the plans were never realised.


Only one electrically powered funicular system was effectively built and
operated, on two separate parts of the "Canal de la Marne au Rhin". It
was successfully tested in 1910 in Jarville, close to Nancy, and fully
installed just before the start of the First World War, by another
French engineer, Edouard Imbeaux. It replaced a submerged cable steam
towboat (described above).

One line was 7 kilometres or 4.3 miles long (passing through the 5 km or
3.1 miles long "tunnel de Mauvages"), the other line was 5 kilometres
long (going through the "souterrain de Foug"). The speed of the cable
could be adjusted in order to pass the sluices. The lines were operated
until 1933, when they were replaced by the only trolley barge system
still in use today (described above).

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------



4\. Motor locomotive haulage (electric mules)

The only method that found a widespread use, at least on a regional
scale, adhered to the old and primitive method of haulage or towing by
mules on the path next to the canal. But, for the slow and uneconomical
animal, a more efficient mechanical mule was substituted, hooked up to a
trolleyline. The machines were either run upon a track on the banks of
the canal - this method being practically a railway along the banks, the
boats being trailers connected by a 50 metre (165 feet) long tow line to
the motor cars (illustration below) - or either run upon the towpath
itself - this method somewhat resembling a land-based [trolleytruck
convoy]({filename}/posts/electric-road-trains-in-germany-1901-1950.md)
(picture above).

As with the animal powered systems, two persons were needed to operate
the convoy: one on the banks (driving the locomotive or truck) and one
on the boat (steering). Using this method none of the boats were
equipped with a motor, which resulted in the same advantages as with the
funicular system: any boat previously towed by mules or horses could be
hauled in this way without any adaptations or the need for a specially
designed towboat, and no wash was created, leaving the delicate canal
banks untouched and eliminating the need for deeper waterways.



In France, after some years of unsuccessful experiments with common
steam locomotives on the tow path (starting in 1873), the first
"electric horse" was tested in 1895 by M. Galliot on the Bourgogne
Canal. The vehicle was a small, three-wheeled trolleytruck (see the
first picture). It drove on the tow path on metallic wheels (without the
use of rails) and could haul a barge at a speed of 2.5 to 3 kilometres
an hour (1.5 to 1.9 mph). This velocity was not much higher than that of
an animal hauled barge, but the electric horse could tow considerably
more weight.

The following year, the "Société de Halage Electrique" set up the
technology on a 43 kilometres long stretch of the "Canal de la Deûle"
and the "Canal d'Aire", from Béthune to Douai (close to the city of
Lille in Northern France, on the border with Belgium). After some
initial difficulties, a year-round regular service was established from
1898 on. The track was soon lengthened to 55 kilometres (34 miles),
including the "Canal de la Dérivation de la Scarpe", all the way to
Courchelettes. In 1900, around 120 of these engines were in use.



However, the metallic wheels had a detrimental effect on the tow path,
and the maintenance costs shot up. The service was discontinued in 1904
and replaced by tractors on rails (picture above). Experiments with this
technology had been conducted in 1902 on a one kilometre (0.6 miles)
stretch of the "Canal de la Sensée" (connecting Courchelettes with the
river l'Escaut).


These tractors, devised by M. Chanay, were twice as powerful as the
trolleytrucks (boasting 40 HP and weighing 6 tons) and could tow 3 to 4
barges at a speed of 3 kilometres an hour (1.9 mph). In 1904, the
rail-based system was installed along the 28 kilometre (17 miles) long
"Canal de la Sensée" and along the busiest parts of the 55 kilometres
(34 miles) of canal previously serviced by the trolleytrucks.

In 1907, around 30 tricycles (without rails) and 60 tractors on rails
were operated on this 83 kilometre (51 miles) long trajectory, and a
total of 3,408,764 tons of goods was transported (around 20,000 barge
transports).

3,731 kilometres or 2,318 miles

The network was gradually enlarged (maps
[here](http://cnum.cnam.fr/CGI/fpage.cgi?ECCMC6.90/1224/100/1225/1216/1225)
- scroll to the right -,
[here](http://papidema.chez-alice.fr/accueil/canal/intro/Traction_vn_1.html#cartemasselin)
and
[here](http://papidema.chez-alice.fr/accueil/canal/intro/Traction_vn_1.html#reseau-tract))
and mechanical mules became a common sight on almost every canal in
Northern and Eastern France.

In 1940, they were used on 2,986 kilometres (1,855 miles) of canals. At
its height, in 1958, the network was 3,731 kilometres (2,318 miles)
long, of which 1,047 km (650 miles) on rails (using 1,700 tractors) and
2,684 km (1,667 miles) on tyres (using 770 tractors, mostly diesel
powered by then - trolleytrucks [were considered
obsolete]({filename}/posts/trolleytrucks-trolleybuses-cargotrams.md)).
Mechanical mules were operated until 1973.

Animal power abolished

Electric mules on rails turned out to be much more reliable on the
towpath than trolleytrucks, being operational every day and both day and
night. The trolleytruck system only worked during daylight (at night too
many drivers would end up in the water) and it could not be operated in
winter conditions. The use and maintenance of the track system was two
times cheaper than the trolleytruck system, but because of the higher
capital costs a trolleytruck system remained a better choice on sections
where traffic was low.



Compared to mule traction, both mechanical systems were more reliable,
cheaper and faster - crossing the "Canal de la Sensée" took one day
compared to 3 to 4 days with mules. Still, horse and mule traction
continued to coexist with mechanical traction (and self-propelled boats)
until 1940, when it was abolished on most canals. The slower animals
became too much of a nuisance for the mechanical tractors, even if they
worked on the other bank of the canal. From that year on, only
mechanical means were allowed to tow barges.


Belgium

Electric mules were also used in other countries, be it on a much
smaller scale. The first electric mules were operated not in France but
in Belgium. In 1901, a 16 kilometre (9.9 miles) stretch of the canal
between Brussels and Charleroi was equipped with electric mules (both on
rails and on tyres) by Léon Gérard (picture on the right). This was
later extended to 47 km (29 miles). As mentioned above, a short part of
this line was (for some years) served by trolley towboats instead of
electric mules.

Germany

The Germans started their experiments with common steam locomotives on
the "Finow Canal" in 1890. The results were spectacular, these machines
being able to tow 7 barges at a speed of 7 kilometres per hour (4.3 mph)
without any noticeable wash created. However, the energy consumption was
very high, which made the system uneconomical.



In 1899, they tested an electric tractor on rails designed by M.
Kottgen, an engineer of Siemens. It differed from the electric mules
used by the French and the Belgians, using only one rail. On the side of
the canal, these vehicles did not rest on a rail but on two much larger
iron wheels (pictures above).

These large wheels were aimed to assure the stability of the tractor,
but they had the disadvantage that they quickly caused deep grooves in
the tow path. While initially developed to save costs in laying tracks,
maintenance costs soared and the method was abandoned.


1903, the Germans installed a mechanical traction method similar to that
of the French on a 1.3 kilometre (0.8 miles) stretch of the "Teltow
Canal", close to Berlin. In 1905 and 1906, the transport network was
extended to 70 kilometres (43 miles) using 22 vehicles. It remained in
service until 1945, when it was dismantled by the Soviets.

The German vehicles (picture on the right) were more sophisticated than
those of the French. They were equipped with a system that regulated the
speed of the boat while the speed of the tractor remained the same, by
mechanically adjusting the length of the tow cable. In France, tractors
started slowly and gradually increased their speed in order not to get
pulled into the water by the barge.

Another electric mule system worth mentioning, technically similar but
used for different purposes, is the one that is [still being operated on
the Panama Canal](http://mikeandkatetv.com/panamacity1-5.htm). In this
case, the electric mules guide rather than tow the much larger ships
(which keep using their engines).


the US, electric mules were tested, but none of them were ever put in
operation. One exception was a short and partial service on the Erie
canal in Ohio in 1900, over a distance of 67 kilometres (42 miles). It
was meant to be extended along the entire length of the canal from
Toledo to Cincinnatti, a distance of about 393 kilometres (244 miles).
But, the company quickly went bankrupt and the already existing tracks
were dismantled.

Two barges crossing

On the larger part of the canal trajectories in France, traction
occurred only at one side of the canal. When two tractors going in
opposite direction met, they switched barges and drove back to where
they came from (one barge had to navigate over the sunken towline of the
other).

A similar method had been in use with mules and horses for centuries. On
the Teltow canal in Germany and, later, on some canals in France, tracks
were laid on both side of the canal, which made towing easier but more
expensive.

Loading and unloading


disadvantage of electric mules was that they interfered with the loading
and unloading of goods. But, as can be seen on the illustration above,
this could be bypassed with an extra dock and two tracks (this design
was actually built on the Teltow canal).

To prevent the tractors from being pulled into the water by the barges,
they were made very heavy, sometimes by using reinforced concrete.
Furthermore, the rail on the side of the canal was placed a few
centimetres higher than the other one.

Automobiles

As time passed, [many different kinds of
vehicles](http://papidema.chez-alice.fr/accueil/cadres-accueil.html)
were put into action. Diesel powered trucks slowly replaced
trolleytrucks, and in France as well as in Belgium [common
automobiles](http://papidema.chez-alice.fr/accueil/cadres-accueil.html)
were used also (picture below). After World War One, even tanks and
other military vehicles were used to tow barges (picture above), without
much success. Smaller companies kept using animals as part of a mix of
materials.


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

5\. Unmanned electric mules

A final method, mainly researched by the Americans but eventually only
applied in France, blended all of the previously described methods more
or less together in what is probably the most bizarre of all systems. It
consisted of an unmanned electric mule, operated from the barge, riding
on a rigid rail or rack, or suspended in the air on a cable, parallel to
the canal - either on the banks or over the water. The unmanned
locomotives - to which the boats were attached by a tow line and an
electric line for control - received current from a trolley line.



Many different systems were designed and tested, of which the system
invented by Richard Lamb became the best known (picture above). In 1896,
three years after the experiments with the Frank W. Hawley trolleyboat
(described above), the Lamb system was tested on a 6 kilometre (3.7
miles) stretch of the Erie Canal (at Tonawanda) and on the Raritan Canal
in New Jersey. The idea was to use cheap electricity generated by the
Niagara waterfalls, but eventually nothing happened. In 1898, the Lamb
system was tested on the Finow Canal in Germany, but the Germans decided
in favour of electric mules.


Duplex structure

With the Lamb system, on approaching another boat coming from the
opposite direction, motors were stopped, cables were disconnected, and
boats exchanged cables (and thus motors) and proceeded.

Some other systems allowed for the passing of two barges without
exchanging motors, even if the track was laid out only on one side of
the canal.

In the system designed by Joseph Sachs (illustration below), for
instance, a duplex structure was used on which the motors or haulers
were run between the middle and upper end middle and lower rails.

A similar rack system designed by Wood (illustration on the right) was
tested on a part of the Erie canal in 1903. The results were very
positive: four loaded boats were hauled at a speed of 7.2 km/h (4.5
mph), compared to 2.8 km/h (1.75 mph) for a mule towing one barge, and
this without threatening the banks.

While the members of the commission before whom the experiments were
conducted were satisfied with the success of the scheme, they decided to
wait for the completion of the extension and deepening out of the canal
network (the "Barge Canal") before authorizing a permanent installation.
But when this job was done, some decades later, diesel powered boats had
become the norm.



Another test, using a system designed by Stillwell and Putnam, was
performed on the Lehigh canal in Pasadena in 1907. The experiments were
successful and the canal company was convinced of the feasibility of the
technique. Unfortunately, they calculated that to justify the
expenditure, the canal required 3 times as much cargo volume, and that
never happened.

Debate


Americans strongly believed that the unmanned mule was the best
electrical system to propel canal boats, while the French and the
Germans found the system to be rather problematic and were convinced
that manned mules (their invention) were a much better option. They only
saw limited use for unmanned mules, for instance in tunnels and in ports
- an obvious advantage of most of these unmanned systems was that they
kept the banks of the canal free.

This difference of opinions led to extensive comparisons in books and
magazines, coming to opposite conclusions. Fact is, the Americans never
put any electrical mules in practice, manned or unmanned, while the
French used them both - the unmanned mules indeed only for specific
uses.

Zinzins

The most spectacular application of unmanned mules was developed by the
Frenchman Chéneau. The small 600 kilogram locomotives, suspended in the
air on a cable, were known as "zinzins" and closely resembled the Lamb
system. Parallel to the cable was trolleyline, which powered the motor.



The system was installed in the 1920s and was used to enter and leave
sluices on a few canals in northern and eastern France. The towing of
barges through sluices happened mainly by men, not by mules or horses,
because it was a rather complicated task. Some "zinzins" remained in
service until the arrival of self-propelled diesel boats.

The Americans made interesting plans, though, like the idea to suspend a
rail upon which the motor runs, over the canal. This method would have
had the advantage of affording a direct pull, but the cost of
construction would be substantially higher than with the other systems.
In the illustration below there is even a railway envisioned on top of
the system.



----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Bring back the trolleyboats!

All the above is more than a gallery of obsolete technology. Canal
transport is already one of the most energy-efficient ways to transport
goods. For every litre of fuel burned, a barge can carry a tonne of
cargo for 127 kilometres (79 miles), compared to 97 km (60 miles) for a
train and 50 km (31 miles) for a truck
([source](http://www.oecdobserver.org/news/fullstory.php/aid/2150/Cleaner_flow_of_goods.html)).
Electrifying canals could boost this efficiency even further, bringing
the possibility of a zero-emission transport system within reach.


days many canals have reinforced banks, so trolley systems with a
propeller would no longer pose a problem. However, especially
interesting are those systems in which traction happens on land instead
of in the water (all systems excluding a propeller), because they are
extremely energy-efficient.

To move a barge of a certain tonnage at low speeds, an electric mule (or
any of the other systems described) needs an engine at least 4 times
less powerful than when this engine would be placed on the boat itself,
propelling a screw
([source](http://papidema.chez-alice.fr/accueil/cadres-accueil.html)).
Wheels are more efficient than propellers. This means that for every
litre of fuel, a barge towed by a machine on the banks or via a chain on
the bottom of the canal could carry a tonne of cargo for 500 kilometres
(310 miles) - ten times more efficient than a truck or lorry.

Zero-emissions transport system

Because many canals have locks and thus artificial height differences
between water surfaces, renewable energy could be generated on the spot.
The required electricity to power the barges could also be generated by
wind turbines or solar panels, which would make a
[zero-emissions](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/zero_emissions/)
transport system also possible in flat countries. Because of the very
low energy requirements, the investment in renewable energy would be
relatively small (contrary to, for instance, the plans to charge
[electric
cars]({filename}/posts/fast-charging-electric-cars-off-peak-grid.md)
using solar panels). And as always, [obsolete
systems](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/obsolete-technology.html) can be
substantially improved with today's technology and materials.

Low-tech canals

Of course, canal barges are much
[slower](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/speed/) than trucks or trains.
But, if they could haul cargo for almost nothing, it would still be an
economical choice for many goods. This advantage would grow if oil
prices would rise. Many abandoned canals could be put in use again, and
even new ones could be built.

Almost all methods above were designed for use on very shallow,
trapezoidal "low-tech" canals, which were only 2 metres (6.5 feet) deep
at the centre, and much less on the sides (see picture below). These are
not public works like the Panama Canal which would take decades and
require thousands of workers (or energy-guzzling machines) to build.
This is something that might even be done on a community level.

© Kris De Decker (edited by Vincent Grosjean)

![](https://www.paypalobjects.com/en_US/i/scr/pixel.gif){width="1"
height="1"}



----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Sources (in chronological order):

-   "[Halage
    funiculaire](http://cnum.cnam.fr/CGI/sresrech.cgi?4KY28.32/037)", La
    Nature, December 15, 1888
-   "[Gov. Flower's trolley plan: he would equip the Erie Canal with
    electricity](http://query.nytimes.com/gst/abstract.html?res=980DE7DF163EEF33A25753C1A9609C94629ED7CF&scp=5&sq=trolley+canal+boats&st=p)",
    The New York Times, June 10, 1893
-   "[Electrical boats and
    navigation](http://www.archive.org/details/electricalboats01sachgoog)",
    Martin Thomas Commerford, 1894 (this book has many more technical
    details on the methods used).
-   "[Electricity on the canals; another scheme for utilizing the
    trolley
    system](http://query.nytimes.com/gst/abstract.html?res=9906E5DA1638E233A25752C2A9679C94659ED7CF)",
    The New York Times, January 21, 1894 (electric mules)
-   "[Traction mécanique des bateaux sur les
    canaux](http://cnum.cnam.fr/CGI/fpage.cgi?ECCMC6.62/44/100/941/927/941)",
    Mémoires et compte rendu des travaux de la Société des Ingenieurs
    Civils, January 18, 1895
-   "[Trolleyline for Canalboats: contract signed for an experimental
    system of four miles - how it would be
    operated](http://query.nytimes.com/gst/abstract.html?res=9D0DE7D8103DE433A25755C2A9619C94649ED7CF)",
    The New York Times, July 26, 1895
-   "[Electricity on the Erie
    Canal](http://query.nytimes.com/gst/abstract.html?res=9903E6D61039E033A2575BC2A96F9C94649ED7CF)",
    The New York Times, September 28, 1895
-   "[The Canal Trolley works well: succesful test of the new system of
    propulsion](http://query.nytimes.com/gst/abstract.html?res=9C0CE3D7113DE433A25754C2A9669D94649ED7CF&scp=1&sq=trolley+canal+boats&st=p)",
    The New York Times, October 27, 1895
-   "[Boats run by electricity, how the Lamb system has been found to
    work on the
    Erie](http://query.nytimes.com/gst/abstract.html?res=9F03EEDC1139E033A25757C2A9679D94649ED7CF)",
    The new York Times, November 24, 1895
-   "[Der Elektrische
    Schiffzug](http://www.digitalis.uni-koeln.de/Meyer/meyer_index.html)",
    Georg Meyer, 1906
-   "[History of the canal system of the state of New
    York](http://www.history.rochester.edu/canal/bib/whitford/old1906/)",
    Nobel E. Whitford, 1906
-   "[Canals and other inland
    waters](http://www2.census.gov/prod2/decennial/documents/01904445ch6.pdf)",
    US Census Bureau, 1907 or 1908 (pdf)
-   "[La traction électrique des bataux sur les
    canaux](http://cnum.cnam.fr/CGI/fpage.cgi?ECCMC6.90/947/100/1225/1216/1225)",
    Mémoires et compte rendu des travaux de la Société des Ingenieurs
    Civils, November 1908 (lots of technical details here also, but in
    French).
-   "[Un neuvo systema de sirga funicular electrico para
    barcos](http://ropdigital.ciccp.es/pdf/publico/1914/1914_tomoI_2020_03.pdf)",
    M.Ed.Imbeaux, 1914 (pdf)
-   "[Le canal de Bourgogne et son
    traffic](http://www.persee.fr/web/revues/home/prescript/article/geoca_1164-6268_1928_num_4_1_6644)", A.
    Desaunais, 1928
-   "[Electric mule could propel a canal boat
    system](http://www.rootsweb.ancestry.com/%7Eohwarren/Bogan/bogan103.htm)",
    the US GenWeb project, July 29, 2004
-   "[The canals of England and Wales and their
    history](http://canalguide.co.uk/canal_histroy.htm)", Jeanette
    Brigss, 2008.
-   "[Traction mécanique sur les voies
    navigables](http://papidema.chez-alice.fr/accueil/canal/Traction_vn.html)", G.
    de Frontenay (website - many pictures here)
-   "[Le tunnel de
    Mauvages](http://bordabord.org/news/le-tunnel-de-mauvages-1-3)",
    bordabord.org (many pictures)
-   "[The Erie Canal](http://www.eriecanal.org)" (website).

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
   
   
   
   
 ------------------------------------------------------------------------

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Related articles:

-   
    [Cargo ships, then and
    now]({filename}/posts/sailing-ships-large-crew-automated-control.md):
    which one is faster?
-   [Boat
    mills]({filename}/posts/boat-mills-bridge-mills-and-hanging-mills.md):
    water powered, floating factories
-   [Medieval
    smokestacks]({filename}/posts/peat-and-coal-fossil-fuels-in-pre-industrial-times.md):
    peat canals in the Low Countries
-   [Recycling human and animal dung is the key to sustainable
    farming]({filename}/posts/recycling-animal-and-human-dung-is-the-key-to-sustainable-farming.md):
    dung canals in China and the Netherlands
-   [Trolleybusses and
    trolleytrucks]({filename}/posts/trolleytrucks-trolleybuses-cargotrams.md)
-   [Water powered cable
    trains]({filename}/posts/water-powered-cable-trains.md)
-   [Electric road
    trains]({filename}/posts/electric-road-trains-in-germany-1901-1950.md)
-   [Underground freight
    networks]({filename}/posts/a-world-without.md)
-   [Human powered cranes & lifting
    devices]({filename}/posts/history-of-human-powered-cranes.md)
-   [How to tie the world together: ropes and
    knots]({filename}/posts/lost-knowledge-ropes-and-knots.md)
-   [Aerial
    ropeways]({filename}/posts/aerial-ropeways-automatic-cargo-transport.md):
    automatic cargo transport for a bargain
-   [The mechanical transmission of
    power]({filename}/posts/the-mechanical-transmission-of-power-3-wire-ropes.md):
    endless rope drives
-   [How to downsize a transport
    network]({filename}/posts/the-chinese-wheelbarrow.md):
    the Chinese wheelbarrow

[Main page](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/)

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

  

  

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
