Title: Life before television
Date: 2008-03-16 23:56
Author: Kris De Decker
Category: Obsolete Technology
Tags: history, low-tech, low-tech magazine, magic lantern, multimedia, optical toys, panorama, peepshow, pre-cinema, stereoscope
Slug: turn-off-your-f
Status: published


Turn off your flat screen television and get lost in 17th, 18th and 19th
century optical entertainment.

Nowadays, televisions and cinemas have a remarkable image quality and
size, computer games boast impressive graphics, and portable media
devices make it possible to watch movies anywhere you want.

But, before the birth of modern multimedia, our ancestors were all but
cut off from vivid graphics and virtual reality. Innovative low-tech
devices delivered amazing effects and fulfilled almost the same role
that television, cinema and media players do today. Some features of
these even modern multimedia does not match.

  
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

src="http://pagead2.googlesyndication.com/pagead/show\_ads.js"&gt;  

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

1\. THE PANORAMA

Cinema and television create an illusion of movement by showing a
sequence of still images of mostly 24 frames per second. Before cinema
was invented, a similar effect was created with another, more cumbersome
system.

Artists made very wide paintings (sometimes up to several kilometres in
length and as high as a present cinema screen) which were attached to
two large mechanically driven cylinder-shaped spools. The screen was
then slowly rolled up on one side, while being unwound on the other
side.



Four screens

Travel was the favourite theme of these moving panoramas: spectators
could be taken on a steamship voyage along the Nile, a rail journey from
Moscow to Peking, an adventure to the Arctic regions or on a trip on a
hot-air balloon (in this case the screen was rolled up vertically).
Other popular themes included biblical or legendary stories and famous
battles.

With time, moving panoramas became quite sophisticated. In one of the
best documented examples – the "Trans-Siberian railroad" panorama shown
in 1900 – three additional smaller screens were added in front of the
main screen. *(see picture above)*


to the spectators stood a horizontal screen displaying the sand and
pebble stones of the railroad track, moving at 300 meters per minute.
Next a vertical screen displaying shrubs, moving at a speed of 120
meters per minutes.

Behind that was a larger screen exposing the cities and houses nearby
the railway, moving at 40 meters per minute. The last and largest screen
stood 8 meters high and moved slowly at only 5 meters a minute,
presenting the sky, mountains, woods, clouds and villages and cities
further away.

To complement the experience, spectators were seated in mock train
carriages while they watched the panorama. The ‘trainride’, accompanied
by sound-effects and a narrative explaining what was seen – lasted 45
minutes.

In another panorama simulating a boat ride, the passengers were also
moved up and down in a replica of a steamboat to imitate the effects of
the waves (this was also called a mareorama, *see picture above*). The
experience was completed with steam whistles, smoke and wind effects.

A moving panorama ("The herioc life and career of Garibaldi") was
digitalized at high resolution and can be seen on the internet ([part
1](http://dl.lib.brown.edu/garibaldi/side1.html) & [part
2](http://dl.lib.brown.edu/garibaldi/side2.html) & the
[introduction](http://dl.lib.brown.edu/garibaldi/panorama.php?PHPSESSID=10b1c4c6159a898b09d4f5cce8fbc184)
to the project).

Circular panoramas

Panoramas have a deeper history than the present-day cinema. They
experienced the height of their popularity in the 1850s and maintained
being the preferred mass medium until the beginning of the 20th century.

Moving panoramas evolved out of circular panoramas, which were patented
in 1787 in the UK by Robert Barker (see one of his smaller paintings
[here](http://www.acmi.net.au/aic/BARKER_EDINBURGH_500.jpg)). They were
exposed in specially designed, circular buildings (rotundas), with a
typical diameter of 40 meters and a height of up to 20 meters.

Panorama paintings were nothing new then, but being completely
surrounded by the scene gave spectators a different perspective, and a
heightened sense of perceived reality. Some of these paintings are
currently available on the internet, but when portrayed on a flat
surface the effect of the circular panorama is pretty much lost*.*

These circular panoramas were shown in a place for one season and then
moved around the country and around the globe, meaning that they were
seen by hundreds of thousands of people. The most popular showings were
the depiction of famous (and mostly recent) battles. Other included
themes were landscapes, cityscapes, biblical scenes or gardens (a
panorama of Versailles was the first to be shown in the US, in 1829).

Panoramas were also used to attract immigrants to the New World. At the
end of the 19th century, Paris had 13 rotundas. Almost every large city
in Europe and in parts of the US had at least one panorama building.
Today, only about a dozen of these buildings remain.

Team work


The panorama combined art and technological innovation to produce a
popular spectacle. It was the cinema of its time, providing spectators
with an outlet for escapism, a chance to travel to exotic lands and
times. Panoramas demanded a large initial investment, which was
reimbursed by entrance fees.

Just as on movie sets it took a large team of people to put a panorama
together. Over approximately one year, the requirements for the making
of a panorama were as follows: investigating the scene (by travel),
making sketches, and of course the painting itself.

Painting a circular panorama was quite a challenge. The correct usage of
perspective was imperative and the use of colours had to be perfect to
maintain the illusion from every angle. Just as with moving panoramas,
the illusion of circular panoramas was heightened by additional effects.

The spectators could not see the top or bottom of the painting. They
were standing underneath a shelter, and on the floor between the public
platform and the painting itself objects were placed – like trenches,
weapons, helmets and cannons in the case of a battle.

These objects were partly painted and partly real, which further
heightened the illusion of being a part of the place projected *(which
is shown very well in this - modern - egyptian panorama above)*. Light
effects and a soundtrack completed the illusion. Before arriving at the
scene, the spectators went through a darkened, disorienting corridor.

Souvenirs

Small reproductions of panoramas were sold as souvenirs, a gesture
similar to the buying of a dvd after seeing the movie on a cinema
screen. The panorama was – of course – made almost obsolete bythe
introduction of cinema (through an intermediate step called cinerama),
but in Russia and Asia particularly, they continued to be popular well
into the 20th century.

Even today, some enthusiasts keep the art form alive *(see for example
this [panorama of Big
Sur](http://www.andrebalyon.net/panorama-big-sur.php) below)*. Thanks to
digital imaging technology and the internet, the panorama has found a
new niche, that of virtual panoramic scenes. However, the effect is not
quite the same as the viewer is not physically immersed in the space.

*

Cut to pieces

Because of their size, most panorama paintings were destroyed or cut
into pieces which were then sold to collectors. The website
[www.panoramapainting.com](http://www.panoramapainting.com/) gives an
overview of all remaining panoramas worldwide, stored in musea or still
on display, and directs you to the websites for more information. Some
panoramas can be seen online.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

2\. THE STEREOSCOPE

In the 20th century, television became the preferred mass medium for
entertainment, education and information. Before this, in the 19th
century, that role was fulfilled by the stereoscope, a device that
enabled two-dimensional images to be transformed into three-dimensional
views.

For us, the stereoscope seems nothing more than the ancestor of the View
Master, a children's toy that is still being sold today. However, in the
1800s, the enormously popular stereoscope occupied a central role in
every western household. A large
[diversity](http://users.telenet.be/thomasweynants/stereoscope.html) of
the product was available: from handheld devices over table models to
large saloon floor models for the whole family, resembling a television
set.

  ---
    
 ---









The stereoscope projects the illusion of depth by showing two pictures
of the same scene or object next to each other, both taken from a
slightly different angle (a horizontal difference of about 6
centimetres, the distance between two human eyes). Experienced observers
can enjoy the stereoscopic effect without a viewer, with [hard
concentration and
focus](http://www.usm.maine.edu/%7Erhodes/0Help/StereoView.html). Some
stereoviews [change their
appearance](http://www.blenders.se/ebay/me/stere.html) in the presence
of strong background light.


The device was thought of in the 1830s and arrived on the market in
1851. At first, stereoscopic views were drawn by hand, but it was with
the incorporation of photographs that the technology really took off,
because it made the production much easier and faster. Soon afterwards
cameras with two lenses were introduced, so that the pictures could be
taken with just one click.

Stereoview collections

Popular themes were landscapes, buildings, monuments, nudes (both
[male](http://users.telenet.be/thomasweynants/culturephysique.html) and
[female](http://users.telenet.be/thomasweynants/stereo-nudes.html)), war
scenes, scientific subjects and exotic places. Two large stereoview
collections can be found [here](http://www.stereoviews.com/) (divided by
theme) and [here](http://www.worldofstereoviews.com/) (divided by
country). Links to all the databases of stereoviews on the internet are
available [here](http://www.stereoviews.info/).

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

3\. THE MAGIC LANTERN

The magic lantern is a most intriguing pre-cinema device. Similar to a
present-day slide projector it enlarges projections from smaller
transparant
[slides](http://www.luikerwaal.com/newframe_uk.htm?/inh_platen_uk.htm)
(painted or photographed).

In its simplest form, the fantascope fulfilled the same role as the
stereoscope, sharing with people stories, things and places they had
never seen or heard of before. For its time, the magic lantern achieved
a level of technology that has yet to be matched by today's standards.

  ---
    
 ---





(Pictures taken from [The
Luikerwaal](http://www.luikerwaal.com/indexx_uk.htm)- the page has more)

The magic lantern was invented in mid 17th century and has an odd
appearance of which
[many](http://www.magiclantern.org.uk/lanternimages.html)
[variations](http://www.luikerwaal.com/newframe_uk.htm?/inh_lantaarns_uk.htm)
exist. In essence, it comprises of a lightproof box except for a
peephole on which a lens is mounted. The top of the box has a roof-like
appearance with a tube resembling a chimney, through which the smoke and
heat of the [light source](http://www.luikerwaal.com/licht_uk.htm)
(candles or oil lamps - later on electric sources were used) can escape.
Inside the box there is a parabolic mirror to reflect the light. People
owned magic laterns, but just as was the case with peepshows, showmen
travelled from place to place to give performances.

Opaque objects

Other (later) types of magic lanterns did not project transparant slides
but two-dimensional opaque images such as engravings, drawings, pages of
books, pictures and even three-dimensional objects like puppets, skulls,
coins or leaves. These devices are called [episcopes and
epidiascopes](http://www.luikerwaal.com/newframe_uk.htm?/inh_lantaarns_uk.htm)
(the latter is the name for a magic lantern that can project both
transparent slides as well as opaque objects). An intense light, placed
inside the box, illuminates the object from both sides. The objects are
hung upside down in the box and appear upright on the wall or the
screen, in their original colour and texture.




Phantasmagoria

Eventually, the magic lantern did more than just project images on a
wall. By sliding two images over each other, effects could be obtained,
like a sleeping man swallowing rats. Parts of 3D puppets were made
movable with steel wire tied together. To make the object move on the
screen, the mechanism was being operated from outside the box.

But the most remarkable use of the magic lantern appeared with the
so-called Phantasmagoria shows. These were the late 18th century
ancestor of the horror movie (more information
[here](http://www.luikerwaal.com/newframe_uk.htm?/inh_geschiedenis_uk.htm),
[here](http://users.telenet.be/thomasweynants//assaulted.html) and
[here](http://www.acmi.net.au/AIC/PHANTASMAGORIE.html)). For these
shows, the magic lantern was mounted on wheels, which made it look like
a film camera. The phantascope (or fantascope), as was called this type
of magic lantern, had several capacities of a movie camera - one of
which was auto-focus.

Often, skeletons, demons, ghosts and witches were projected on a
translucent screen or a smoke screen between the phantascope and the
spectators. By rolling the device forwards and backwards, the image on
the wall became smaller or bigger, giving the spectators the illusion
that the ghost was attacking them or moving away and vanishing.

The showmen sometimes used several projectors simultaneously, for
projecting several moving ghosts. Later on, optical effects using
mirrors were added, which made ghosts appear in all places. Combined
with freightening sounds and smoke these effects this scared many people
half to death.

Ombre Blanche


technique of the phantasmagoria was the “[Ombre
Blanche](http://users.telenet.be/thomasweynants//whiteschadow.html)” or
white shadow, the opposite of the better known shadow play. This could
be considered the low-tech variant of the phantascope, since all that
was needed was a peep box without a lens and a very faint light source
like a birtday candle. Yet here, several ghosts in different colours
could be moving through a darkened room, without complex actions or
mechanical constructions.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

4\. THE PEEPSHOW


The peepshow could be described as the first modern multimedia gadget.
It is a box with an eyehole, through which the spectator can see a
miniature scene, painted or constructed in perspective (or a combination
of both).

Both the stereoscope and the magic lantern evolved out of the peepshow,
which was invented around 1660 and had an even earlier ancestor in the
13th century (the perspective views of Leon Battista Alberti).An
exaggerated perspective, effective use of colour and light effects and
(sometimes) a simple lens create the illusion of depth. Light is
externally supplied by the sun or the moon, or from candles placed
inside the wooden box. All this creates a very realistic effect, which
would amaze even 21st century high-tech media addicts.

A peepshow sometimes had several eyeholes (like the early Dutch box
above), enabling more people to watch the scene at the same time. It
could be a small, portable device, or a larger table or floor model. The
first televisions in the 20th century used peeping - the simple act of
gazing through an eyehole.



*(Picture peepbox & illustration taken from [Early Visual
Media](http://users.telenet.be/thomasweynants/vue-optique.html) - there
are more illustrations to find, as well as detailed pictures from the
structure of the wooden peepshow)*

Showmen

Peepshows were run by showmen travelling from village to village.
Sometimes, they manipulated parts of the scene from the outside while
the spectators were watching. In most countries today, the peepshow is
mainly used in an erotic context. However, in some places the function
of the original peepshow is still prevalent. The picture below shows a
peepshow in China, with 5 eyeholes.

It will not be long before the Chinese follow suit and will also swap
all their ancient multimedia for a flat screen television and a
game-console. The problem lies in the world not being able to find an
efficient energy source able to power all our high-tech 21st century
gadgets, as unfortunately candles or moonlight just don't cut it
anymore.

© Kris De Decker (edited by Shameez Joubert)

  ---
    
 ---

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Related articles :



[Download, print, fold,
paste]({filename}/posts/download-print.md): the
best cut-outs on the web

[Low-tech
photography]({filename}/posts/camera-obscura.md)
: the pinhole camera and the camera obscura

[Email in the 18th
century]({filename}/posts/email-in-the-18.md) :
the surprising speed of the optical telegraph

[Computing without
electricity]({filename}/posts/computers-antiq.md)
: mechanical calculators

[The monster footprint of digital
technology]({filename}/posts/embodied-energy-of-digital-technology.md)
: how much energy do our gadgets really consume?



[Moonlight
towers]({filename}/posts/moonlight-towers-light-pollution-in-the-1800s.md)
: light pollution in the 1800s

[Unplugged
computergames]({filename}/posts/gaming-unplugge.md)
: a new generation of board games

[Human powered cranes and lifting
machinery]({filename}/posts/history-of-human-powered-cranes.md)
: the sky is the limit

[The Museum of Old
Techniques]({filename}/posts/the-museum-of-old-techniques.md)
: historical alternatives to modern day machinery

[When rich women built
houses]({filename}/posts/dollhouses.md) : dolls'
houses

[Low-tech
solutions](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/low-tech-solutions.html) /
[Obsolete
technology](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/obsolete-technology.html) /
[Ecotech myths](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/ecotech-myths.html) /
[Mixed links & updates](http://www.notechmagazine.com/)

[Main Page](http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/)

  

  

  

